# Bibliographic Note {-}

The detailed references to sources given with each numbered note in the
text serve as the primary record of the evidence used in writing this
volume. This essay provides a general summary of the sources used and
describes the method of locating and evaluating them. As the volume is a
history of technology rather than an institutional history, the burden
of the written evidence lies in technical reports, software
documentation, training manuals, and feasibility studies rather than
memoranda and executive orders. However, the latter sources often
provide the time sense and structure that so quickly fades from an
engineer's mind as he goes on to his next project. Because NASA's
involvement in computer operations during the 1960s and 1970s mirrored
the stumbling discovery of software engineering principles by other
organizations, interviews not only with managers but programmers and
contract liasons in both NASA and contractor offices are a major
contribution to my understanding of the flow of events and their impact
on later decisions and developments. Thus, the sources include the basic
mix found in other NASA histories: written institutional records and
oral interviews, with the addition of an extensive list of technical
material.

Identification of source materials was conducted in several cycles.
First, a comprehensive search through standard references, such as The
Applied Science and Technology Index, was made to identify secondary
sources that dealt with NASA's use of computers. The period surveyed was
1945 to 1981. Articles were found in journals such as Electronics,
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Journal of Guidance and Control, and
various IBM, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and
American Federation of Information Processing Societies publications.
This search revealed that even though NASA is critically dependent on
computers for spaceflight operations, and that even though massive
amounts of material have been written on the space program in general,
relatively little has been published in public journals or in books on
spaceflight specifically treating the use of computers. Most of what has
been published is short and far from comprehensive. In books about space
projects heavily dependent on computers, such as NASA's own Chariots for
Apollo, generally nothing is said about the configuration, programming,
or operation of those computers. Thus, the general public, even the
technically sophisticated public, is largely in the dark about the
specifics of NASA's computer use. That, of course, is one reason why
this volume is needed.

The identification of primary source materials came next. Thanks to a
Faculty Research Grant from Wichita State University, I was able to make
a preliminary visit to the Johnson Space Center while preparing my
contract proposal. This visit provided access to the RECON bibliographic
retrieval system that NASA uses. RECON is especially valuable in this
subject area because key words are rather liberally applied to each item
stored: anything remotely to do with computers had a "computer" key
word. Therefore, search keys could be developed such as
"Apollo\*Computers," and items with both those key words could be
separated from the mass of material on Apollo. The RECON search netted
over 1,000 items, of which about 25% were rejected based on their
abstracts or because the other associated key words indicated that the
item was primarily concerned with another subject, with only passing
reference to computing. The remainder were physically examined in order
to eliminate those that actually did not have pertinent materials. This
process of reading the remaining sources and doing the interviews turned
up a number of new primary sources. The bulk of these sources are
software and hardware specifications, operations reports, flight
training manuals, and spacecraft systems familiarization manuals, which
are not indexed either in standard bibliographies or RECON.

Most items in the NASA archives at the various centers are not listed in
RECON, so memoranda and other such unpublished items were discovered the
"old-fashioned" way: by physically going through the files. My contract
provided for visits to Johnson Space Center, Kennedy Space Center,
Marshall Space Center, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Dryden flight
Research Center, Goddard Space Center, and NASA Headquarters. Archives
do not exist at either Marshall or Goddard, so individuals provided
whatever new sources were gained at those places. In each of the other
centers, a serious perusal of the materials relating to computer usage
was done. At Johnson, the archives transferred to the Woodson Library of
Rice University were also consulted.

The tour of the various NASA facilities demonstrated that those with
full-time historians or archivists had the most useful archives. That
is, of course, obvious, but it is interesting to contrast the situation
at, say, Kennedy versus that at Marshall. Marshall has not had an
archivist or historian since the early 1970s. There is no central
repository. The only way information could be located was by finding
division chiefs in the areas to be researched and then depending on them
to help identify the people who had experience with the actual program.
Those people could then be interviewed and some had kept copies of
appropriate documentation. Others had not. For example, the entire story
of the Saturn launch vehicle preflight checkout system is in danger of
being lost. The people who built it are nearing federal retirement, they
have thrown out almost all of the documentation, and their memories are
clouded by the other projects in which they have been involved in the
last 20 years. At Kennedy, even though a lot of interviews were
conducted, the main source of information was the well-kept library and
archives, which included a technical documents section. There the bulk
of the story of the Shuttle Launch Processing System, the successor to
the Saturn preflight checkout system, can be reconstructed from
specifications, development reports, and user manuals. The point is that
most of NASA will soon be in the state that Marshall is in. Johnson has
lost its full-time historian, and the archives are maintained part-time
by administrative personnel, with some items transferred to the Woodson
Library. The latter facility has no provision for extensive xeroxing and
is closed-shelf, two crippling defects for the historian with limited
time on-site.

With no one at the various centers to choose what should be saved,
documents are being lost at a prodigious rate. It is true that much
paper generated by NASA is not needed for later historical research, but
there is no apparent system of sifting out the material that has
potential for later use. At the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where files
are regularly collected for archiving, there is no active control of
what is sent to the records center. Some boxes contained organized,
indexed files. Others looked as though someone had simply emptied their
desk drawers into them; they contained such items as old copies of the
employees' newsletter amidst notes and memos in no particular order.
Additionally, project managers can choose to delete materials and thus
prevent historians from gaining a balanced perspective.

Personnel assigned as history liasons at each NASA center, even if they
had no historical experience, were unfailingly helpful and cooperative.
They are mentioned and thanked individually in the Acknowledgments. By
contacting them ahead of time, I was able to obtain the names of initial
contacts, which led me to the large number of very candid interviewees
whose collective memory adds so much to this book. They are listed at
the end of this note. I was also able, through the individual efforts of
interviewees, to obtain entry to areas normally restricted to the
public. In that way I was able to see firsthand what I was writing
about. There is no substitute for seeing the computers installed and
operating and for looking at and using the crew interfaces. In that way,
the true scale of things is established in the mind.

The remainder of this bibliographic note is a topic-by-topic summary of
the main sources.

### The Gemini Digital Computer

The most useful written source for the hardware section of the chapter
on Gemini is the NASA Project Gemini Familiarization Manual, Volume 2,
published by McDonnell Corporation in 1965. This manual contains a
detailed hardware description of the Gemini digital computer, its
location in the spacecraft, and drawings of the user interfaces. For the
software development cycle and contents of the Gemini software loads,
Project Gemini: A Technical Summary, (NASA CR-1106, 1968) by P. W. Malik
and G. A. Souris, is the most comprehensive. Ivan Ertel, then of the
Manned Spacecraft Center History Office, conducted extensive interviews
with IBM personnel who worked on the Gemini computer during a visit to
the Owego, New York plant in April of 1968. These interviews are
transcribed and available at Johnson Space Center. They were very useful
in identifying development problems and procedures. Lastly, interviews
with Gene Cernan and John Young provided information about the system
from the user standpoint.

### The Apollo Computer Systems

Sources for this chapter were primarily technical reports issued by the
MIT Instrumentation Lab, memos on file at the Johnson Space Center, and
some very illuminating interviews. The best hardware description of the
Block II computer is in R. Alonso and A. L. Hopkins, The Apollo Guidance
Computer (NASA-CR-1 18183, August 1963). An introduction to developing
software for the computer is B. I. Savage and A. Drake, AGC4 Basic
Training Manual (MIT, January 1967). Copies of these are available at
Johnson Space Center. For NASA's view of the hardware and software
difficulties in developing the onboard computer, the files of Howard W.
Tindall are the most helpful. These are also at Johnson. The best
interview sources for this chapter are John R. Garman of JSC and Stan
Mann, formerly of JSC. Both were involved in the Apollo software
development effort and later in the Shuttle program. Both were extremely
candid and very informative. Transcribed interviews of David Hoag and
Ralph Ragan of MIT were also helpful. Astronaut users Vance Brand, Gene
Cernan, and John Young gave good insights in their interviews. For the
Abort Guidance Section, the best source is P. M. Kurten, Apollo
Experience Report: Guidance and Control Systems-Lunar Module Abort
Guidance System (NASA-TN-D-7990, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, July
1975).

### The Skylab Computer System

The Skylab chapter is overwhelmingly based on two excellent sources,
both produced by IBM Corporation. They are the Design and Operational
Assessment of Skylab ATMDC/WCIU Flight Hardware and Software (IBM No.
74W-00103, May 9, 1974) and the Skylab Reactivation Mission (IBM No.
79W-0005, September 12, 1979). The Skylab hardware and software
development was an operation largely local to Huntsville, Alabama, where
IBM had a continuing corporate presence since the early 1960s when work
on the computer systems for the Saturn launch vehicles began. These two
sources are detailed histories of the development and use of the
computer system in both the primary Skylab mission and the reactivation
mission. They are quite frank, documenting both the first-time successes
and needed restarts, although obviously proud of the highly reliable
record of the system. By the time I reached Huntsville, the IBM office
had closed, but some ATMDC programmers were still on-site working on
Spacelab. By now, those few are scattered elsewhere. One, John Copeland,
was kind enough to be interviewed and lent the reactivation
documentation. Bill Chubb and Jim McMillion of Marshall Spaceflight
Center were also very good sources on the computer system. Steve Bales
of Johnson Space Center was able to give a perspective on the system
from the flight controller's angle and was especially helpful regarding
the first 2 weeks of the primary mission before the crew arrived.

### The Shuttle Data Processing System

At the time this volume was being written, the Shuttle was an ongoing
project. Therefore, abundant primary source materials in the form of
actual requirements and design documents, program code, and managers
involved in the day-to-day production of the hardware and software were
available. Additionally, the astronauts have fresh memories, and the
artifacts described in the chapter can be actually seen and touched. I
decided to try to base this chapter on these sources as much as
possible, plus my personal experiences in using the equipment and
software in simulators. Thus, there are a great number of references to
interviews (of which roughly 35 hours were done) and to current
documentation. Despite this plethora of sources, some things could not
be settled. An example would be the question of who thought up the
eventual scheme used in redundancy management. No one could name a
specific person or a time. Everyone asked about the subject said "it
just evolved," or "no one person thought it up," both of which are true,
but frustrating!

### NASA Standard Spacecraft Computer-1

Since the origination and development of this computer took place at one
place, Goddard Spaceflight Center, it was relatively simple to find
materials and persons. Ann Merwarth, Bill Stewart, and John Azzolini
were the key informants in describing the design and capabilities of
this device. Stewart led me to a documents distribution point where I
was able to get copies of Merwarth's guide to the executive. A fine
source of information is an article in the September 1984 issue of
*Communications of the ACM*, authored by Merwarth, Stewart, and others,
which tried to show the evolution of the system from its beginnings in
the mid-1960s. A chapter on this computer, which was written for an
early draft of the volume was later deleted because it was too much a
restatement of previously published materials.

### Computers On Deep Space Probes

The Jet Propulsion Laboratory has three methods of archiving
documentation. One is the "Vellum File," located in the basement of the
Library and containing on microfilm all technical documentation used in
projects. It is possible to obtain hard copy of critical documents,
which I did when told of their existence by my informants. The Library
itself contains indexes of publications written by JPL personnel,
wherever published and holds copies of most of those in its collection.
A third source, and one very critical for historians, is a central
depository that contains memos and other unpublished documentation from
the project offices and permanent section offices. Materials in this
archive are arranged by JPL section number and stored in boxes. This
collection is very erratic in quality. Almost all the materials cited in
Chapters 5 and 6 were found in one of these three locations.

If the section on Galileo contains omissions, it might be because the
project director refused to let me examine his and his chief deputy's
office files. No reason was given. In the face of the existence of the
actual documents, I thought it was foolish to speculate on any matters
possibly contained within them, as a later historian can examine the
materials after they are retired-assuming, that is, that they are not
destroyed beforehand.

Personal contacts at the Lab were among the most satisfying I had in all
my travels. Engineers at JPL are more introspective and more history
conscious than others I have met. Their help is reflected in the actual
notes to Chapters 5 and 6.

### Evolution Of Launch Processing

Documentation for this chapter was hard to come by, both because the
information was scattered among Johnson, Marshall, and Kennedy Space
Centers, and because pre-Shuttle primary sources at both Marshall and
Johnson had been destroyed. However, the current Launch Processing
System is heavily documented as to function because it is still
operating. Also, Kennedy preliminary studies such as the Space Shuttle
Launch Operations Study are in archives, and published summaries by IBM
tended to be historical in nature. Therefore, the present System is easy
to describe. For specifics of origin, though, I am again indebted to my
informants, particularly Thomas S. Walton, who lived through the entire
era at Kennedy, Jim Lewis of Marshall, Frank Byrne, the genius behind
the common data buffer, and Henry Paul, who headed the development
effort. A short manuscript history by Bill Bailey of Kennedy and an
interview with him were also very helpful.

### Mission Control

Fortunately, a fair amount of original source material is available on
the subject of mission control. Documentation for the Mercury Control
Center software system is contained in detailed IBM handbooks such as
the "Goddard Monitor System," supplied by John Morton. He, J. Perry
Chambers, and Ray Mazur were excellent sources of information on
Goddard's Spaceflight Center's role both in manned and unmanned mission
control. Philco's "IMCC Systems and Performance Requirements" study and
IBM's proposal for the Gemini and Apollo mission control centers are the
best sources for what was installed at the then Manned Spacecraft
Center. Interviews with Lyn Dunseith and James Stokes helped
considerably with that era. Shuttle mission control information is
primarily based on interviews with Dub Pollen, Fred Riddle, and Gene
Campbell of IBM and a publication by S. E. James of that company.
Researchers interested in unmanned mission control of lunar and
planetary probes should consult the final reports of the various
Mariner, Viking, Ranger, Surveyor, and Voyager projects, usually issued
as Jet Propulsion Laboratory technical reports. Each contains a detailed
description of control considerations. George Gianopolis, Richard
Moulder, Lloyd Jennings, Frank Singleton, Carl Johnson, and Don Royer,
all of JPL, each contributed informative interviews for this section.

### Simulations and Image Processing

Again, interviews are the backbone of my understanding any materials
analyzed for this chapter. Jim Raney, Bob Ernull, and Ken Mansfield of
Johnson Space Center provided both knowledge and materials related to
mission and engineering simulators. Jack Lucas and his staff at Marshall
helped with the engineering simulators located there. Finally, Bob
Nathan of JPL, founder of image processing, and his colleague Al Zobrist
clarified the complex world of digital imaging. Almost all written
materials used as sources for this chapter were either given to me by
these informants, or they directed me to them. The monograph Digital
Processing of Remotely Sensed Images, by Johannes G. Moik (NASA SP-431),
is a good reference for NASA's work in this field.


# Interview List {-}

**Note:** Unless identified otherwise, all persons on this list were NASA
employees at the time they were interviewed. Locations are also
indicated at the time of the interview.

AARON, JOHN, Johnson Space Center, June 17, 1983.

ALDRICH, ARNOLD, Johnson Space Center, June 13, 1983.

AZZOLINI, JOHN, Goddard Spaceflight Center, July 2, 1984.

BAILEY, WILLIAM, Kennedy Space Center, June 30, 1983.

BALES, STEVEN, Johnson Space Center, May 31, 1983.

BIEGERT, PAMELA, Kennedy Space Center, June 30, 1983.

BLIZZARD, EDGAR, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 29, 1984.

BOGAN, JACK, IBM, Kennedy Space Center, June 29, 1983.

BORNCAMP, FRANZ, Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

BRADFORD, CLIFFORD, Marshall Space Center, June 20, 1983.

BRAND, VANCE, Johnson Space Center, June 2, 1983.

BULKLEY, R.C., IBM, Kennedy Space Center, June 27 and 29, 1983.

BRUCKNER, BOBBY, Kennedy Space Center, June 30, 1983.

BYRNE, FRANK, Kennedy Space Center, June 29, and July 8, 1983.

CAMPBELL, GENE, IBM, Houston, June 13, 1983.

CERNAN, GENE, telephone interview from Houston, November 7, 1983.

CHAMBERS, J. PERRY, Goddard Spaceflight Center, June 28, 1984.

CHARLEN, WILLIAM, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 18, 1984.

CHUBB, WILLIAM, Marshall Space Center, June 22, 1983.

CLAYTON, ELDON, Johnson Space Center, June 1, 1983.

COPELAND, JOHN, IBM, Marshall Space Center, June 23, 1983.

COX, KENNETH, Johnson Space Center, June 14, 1983.

DEESE, SAMUEL, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, telephone interview, January 31, 1985.

DEETS, DWAIN, Dryden Flight Research Center, May 25, 1984.

DELAUNE, CARL, Kennedy Space Center, July 5, 1983.

DEMING, JAMES E., Kennedy Space Center, July 6, 1983.

DUNSEITH, LYNWOOD, Johnson Space Center, June 2 and 9, 1983.

EISENMAN, DAVID, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 21, 1984.

ERICKSON, JOHN, Johnson Space Center, June 14, 1983.

ERNULL, ROBERT, Johnson Space Center, June 16, 1983.

FOY, LYNNE, Johnson Space Center, June 16 and 17, 1983.

GARMAN, JOHN R., Johnson Space Center, May 25, and June 1, 1983.

GIANOPOLIS, GEORGE, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, June 4, 1984.

GREENBERG, EDWARD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 30, 1984.

HART, TERRY, Johnson Space Center, June 10, 1983.

HARTSFIELD, HENRY, Johnson Space Center, June 2, 1983.

HEDDINS, FREDERICK, IBM, Kennedy Space Center, June 27 and 29, 1983.

HINSON SHIRLEY, Johnson Space Center, June 16, 1983.

HOELZER, HELMUT, Huntsville, Ala., June 24, 1983.

HUGHES, BRAD, Kennedy Space Center, July 5, 1983.

HUGHES, FRANK, Johnson Space Center, June 2, 1983.

JENNINGS, LLOYD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 15, 1984.

JOHNSON, CARL, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 23, 1984.

JOHNSON, DONALD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 16, 1984.

JORDAN, FRANK, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 31, 1984.

KILLINGBECK, LYNN, IBM, Houston, June 7, 1983.

KOHL, WAYNE, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, telephone interview, January 31, 1985.

KOPF, EDWARD H., Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 18, 1984, telephone interview, January 31, 1985.

LANIER, RONALD, Johnson Space Center, June 16, 1983.

LEE, B. GENTRY, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, June 1, 1984.

LEMON, RICHARD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 29, 1984.

LEWIS, JAMES, Marshall Space Center, June 20, 1983.

LINEBERRY, EDWARD, Johnson Space Center, June 2, 1983.

LOCK, WILTON, Dryden Flight Research Center, May 24, 1984.

LOUSMA, JACK, telephone interview from Houston, July 5, 1983.

LUCAS, JACK, Marshall Space Center, June 21, 1983.

MACINA, ANTHONY, IBM, Houston, June 7, 1983.

MALM, RICHARD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 31, 1984.

MANN, STANLEY, Johnson Space Center, June 6 and 8, 1983.

MANSFIELD, KENNETH, Johnson Space Center, June 1, 1983.

MATTOX, RUSSELL, Marshall Space Center, June 23, 1983, telephone interview, November 16, 1984.

MAZUR, RAYMOND, Goddard Spaceflight Center, June 28, 1984.

McMILLION, JAMES, Marshall Space Center, June 22, 1983.

MERWARTH, ANN, Goddard Spaceflight Center, July 3, 1984.

MILLER, BRUCE, Kennedy Space Center, July 5, 1983.

MITCHELL, WALTER, Marshall Space Center, June 23, 1983.

MORECROF'T, JOHN, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 29, 1984.

MORTON, JOHN, Goddard Spaceflight Center, June 27, 1984.

MOULDER, RICHARD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 21, 1984.

NATHAN, ROBERT, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 30, 1984.

OTAMURA, ROY, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 29, 1984.

PALIKOWSKY, RAYMOND, Singer, Houston, June 10, 1983.

PANCIERA, ROBERT, Marshall Space Center, June 20, 1983.

PARRISH, ALBERT, Kennedy Space Center, June 28, 1983.

PARTEN, RICHARD, Johnson Space Center, June 3 and 16, 1983.

PAUL, HENRY, Kennedy Space Center, July 7, 1983.

PENDLETON, THOMAS, Johnson Space Center, June 9, 1983.

PENOVICH, FRANK, Kennedy Space Center, July 1, 1983.

PETYNIA, WILLIAM, League City, TX, June 8, 1983.

POLLEN, DUB, IBM, Houston, June 13, 1983.

RAINES, GARY K., telephone interview from Houston, November 1, 1985.

RANDALL, JOSEPH, Marshall Space Center, June 20, 1983.

RANEY, JAMES, Johnson Space Center, May 31, 1983.

RICE, RICHARD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 29, 1984.

RIDDLE, FREDERICK, IBM, Houston, June 13, 1983.

RONE, KYLE, IBM, Houston, June 3, 1983.

ROYER, DONALD, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, June 7, 1984.

SINGLETON, FRANK, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 17, 1984.

SMITH, GEORGE, IBM, Kennedy Space Center, June 27 and 29, 1983.

STEARNS, JANE, Kennedy Space Center, June 30, 1983.

STEWART, WILLIAM, Goddard Spaceflight Center, July 10, 1984.

STOKES, JAMES, Johnson Space Center, June 14, 1983.

STORY, SCOTT, Ford Aerospace, Johnson Space Center, June 16, 1983.

STOTT, RUSSELL, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 16, 1984.

SULLIVAN, WILLIAM, Johnson Space Center, June 14, 1983.

SWEARINGEN, CHARLES, Huntsville, AL, June 21, 1983.

TINDALL HOWARD W., telephone interview from Washington, D.C., August 10, 1984.

VICK, H.G., Marshall Space Center, June 21, 1983.

VINZ, FRANK, Marshall Space Center, June 21, 1983.

WALTON, THOMAS S., Kennedy Space Center, July 6, 1983.

WILLBANKS, JAMES, IBM, Kennedy Space Center, June 29, 1983.

WOODDELL, JOHN, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 21, 1984.

YARBOROUGH, ROBERT, Kennedy Space Center, July 6, 1983.

YOUNG, JOHN, telephone interview from Johnson Spaceflight Center, March 6, 1984.

ZIPSE, JOHN, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 22 May 1984.

ZOBRIST, ALBERT, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, May 23, 1984.
