### Crew interfaces to the Gemini digital computer

Gemini's digital computer had three sets of interfaces: the
computer's controls, the Manual Data Insertion Unit (MDIU), and the
Incremental Velocity Indicator (IVI). The controls consisted of a mode
switch, a start button, a malfunction light, a computation light, and a
reset switch. The mode switch had seven positions for selection of one
of the measurement or computation programs. The start button caused the
computer to run the selected program loaded in its memory. The reset
switch caused the computer to execute its start-up diagnostics and
prepare itself for action. The MDIU consisted of two parts: a 1 0-digit
keyboard and a 7-digit register. The first two digits of the register, a
simple odometerlike rotary display, were used to indicate a memory
address. Up to 99 such logical addresses could be accessed. The
remaining five digits displayed data. Errors caused all zeroes to
appear. Negative numbers were inserted by making the first digit a nine;
the other digits contained the value. The IVI displayed velocity
increments required for, or as a result of, a powered maneuver. It had
three-digit feet-per-second displays for each of forward-and-back,
up-and-down, and left-to-right axes**^[39](Source1.html)^**.

\newpageon{22}

![**Figure 1--6**. Manual Data Insertion Unit. (From McDonnell Corp., *Gemini
Familiarization Manual*)](images/p22.jpg)

\newpageon{23}

![**Figure 1--7**. Incremental Velocity Indicator. (From McDonnell Corp.,
*Gemini Familiarization Manual*)](images/p23.jpg)

\newpageon{24} On a typical mission the computer would be in operation
during ascent as the backup to the booster. On orbit, if no powered
maneuvers were imminent, it could be shut down to save electrical power.
Due to the nature of core memory, programs and data stored magnetically
in the cores would not disappear when the power was off, as in present
day semiconductor memories. This made it possible to load the next set
of modules, if necessary, from the Auxiliary Tape Memory, enter any
needed parameters, and then shut down the machine until shortly before
its next use. It took 20 seconds for the machine to run its start-up
diagnostics upon restoration of power. After the diagnostics ran
successfully, the current program load was ready for use, all parameters
intact.

GT-IV was following such a procedure in preparing for re-entry on June
7, 1965. The computer was placed in the RNTY mode, and the crew received
and entered updated parameters given to them when they were in contact
with the ground stations. But when they tried to turn the machine off,
the manual on/off switch did not function. The power had to be cut off
by another means, and the re-entry handled
manually**^[40](Source1.html)^**.

Using the computer for catch-up and rendezvous was a relatively simple
task. The difference between catch-up and rendezvous is that catch-up
maneuvers are executed to put the spacecraft into position to make an
orbit-change maneuver. After the orbit change the spacecraft is prepared
to rendezvous with the target**^[41](Source1.html)^**. Crews began the
catch-up by entering the ground-calculated rendezvous angle desired into
address 83. The rendezvous angle indicated how much farther along in a
360-degree orbit the rendezvous was to take place. For example, if the
crew desired rendezvous one-third orbit ahead, 12000 was entered into
address 83 using the MDIU. The interval at which the pilot wanted to see
updates was then entered in address 93. For example, if 04000 was
entered, the computer would display on the IVI any required velocity
changes at 120 degrees from the rendezvous point (the start), 80 degrees
to go, and 40 degrees to go. If the IVI indicated that the computer had
calculated that such a rendezvous was possible within the designated
fuel limits, the astronauts pressed the START button and the IVI
displayed the first set of velocity differentials. The pilot then fired
the thrusters until the displays were all at zero (Astronaut John Young
reported that there was a tendency to "overshoot" in trying to burn to
zero**^[42](Source1.html)^.**). After that, nothing was done unless the
next update indicated a need for more velocity
adjustments**^[43](Source1.html)^**. The astronauts also did
paper-and-pencil calculations of the velocity changes as a backup by
using special nomographs based on time and angles to the
target**^[44](Source1.html)^**. These backup calculations were compared
with the ground-calculated solution as well as the computer solution.
However, the figures computed on-board were considered the primary
solution for the terminal-phase intercept \newpageon{25}
maneuver**^[45](Source1.html)^**. In the rendezvous mode, the radar
would feed information to the computer, which used it to calculate the
velocity adjustments needed for final approach**^[46](Source1.html)^**.

These examples of the use of the computer on a typical flight
demonstrate that it was a relatively straightforward assistant in
guidance and navigation. It permitted the Gemini astronauts to be
independent of the ground in accomplishing rendezvous from the
terminal-phase intercept maneuver to station keeping, a valuable
rehearsal for the lunar orbit rendezvous required for the Apollo
program. The astronauts participated in both the hardware and software
design of the computer and its interfaces, and they were able to go to
Owego and be put in the man-in-the-loop simulations. By flight time,
like everything else in the cockpit, use of the computer was second
nature.
