### The impact of the Gemini digital computer

The Gemini Digital Computer was a transitional machine. Dale
F. Bachman of IBM characterized it as the "last of a dying breed. It was
an airborne computer, ruggedized, special purpose, and
slow"**^[47](Source1.html)^**. Nonetheless, its designers claim an
impressive list of firsts:

-   The first digital computer on a manned spacecraft.

-   The first use of core memory with nondestructive readout. The
    machine was designed in an era of rotating drum memories, its
    designers considered it a step forward**^[48](Source1.html)^**.

-   IBM's first completely silicon semiconductor
    computer**^[49](Source1.html)^**.

-   The first to use glass delay lines as
    registers**^[50](Source1.html)^**.

-   Technologically advanced in the area of packaging
    density**^[51](Source1.html)^**.

-   The first airborne or spaceborne computer to use an auxiliary
    memory**^[52](Source1.html)^**.

Development of the Gemini computer helped IBM in significant ways. It
contributed more than anything else to the hardware and software of the
4Pi series of computers**^[53](Source1.html)^**. This series eventually
produced the computer used on Skylab and the AP101 used in the Shuttle.
It also helped to develop IBM's reputation for delivering reliable and
durable spaceborne hardware and software**^[54](Source1.html)^** . One
Gemini computer restarted successfully after being soaked in salt water
for 2 \newpageon{26} weeks. Another used system went on to NASA's
Electronics Research Laboratory in Boston for use on vertical and short
takeoff and landing projects**^[55](Source1.html)^**. Coupled with IBM's
involvement in the real-time computing centers used to monitor Mercury
and Gemini missions, the company established itself as a major
contributor to America's space program as it had been to the military
research and development effort. Out of early military work came
computer systems such as the Harvard Mark I, the 701, and SAGE computers
used in air defense. However, even though identification with the space
program has been maintained through several highvisibility projects, no
significant commercial hardware products resulted as spinoffs.

For NASA, Gemini and its on-board computer proved that a reliable
guidance and navigation system could be based on digital computers. It
was a valuable test bed for Apollo techniques, especially in rendezvous.
However, the Gemini digital computer itself was totally unlike the
machines used in Apollo. With its Auxiliary Tape Memory and core memory,
the Gemini computer was more like the Skylab and Shuttle general purpose
computers. It is in those systems where its impact is most apparent.
