### Hardware

IBM Corporation received the contract for the Gemini digital
computer on April 19, 1962, amounting to \$26.6 million. It provided for
the construction of the on-board computer and for integration with other
spacecraft systems**^[8](Source1.html)^**. The first machine was in its
final testing phase by August 31, 1963, and IBM delivered the last of 20
such machines by December 1965**^[9](Source1.html)^**. Engineers at IBM
believe that the main reason why their company received the contract was
the successful development of a core memory used on the Orbiting
Astronautical Observatory**^[10](Source1.html)^**. One of them, John J.
Lenz, said that the contract for Gemini came just at the right time. The
best of the engineering teams of the IBM Federal Systems Division plant
in Owego, New York were between assignments and were put on the project,
increasing its chance for success.

Restrictions on size, power, and weight influenced the final form of the
computer in terms of its components, speed, and type of memory. The
shape and size of the computer was dictated by the design of the
spacecraft. It was contained in a box measuring 18.9 inches high by 14.5
inches wide by 12.75 inches deep, weighing 58.98
pounds**^[11](Source1.html)^**. An unpressurized equipment bay to the
left of the Gemini commander s seat held the computer, as well as the
inertial guidance system power supply and the computer auxiliary power
supply. The machine consisted of discrete components, not integrated
circuits**^[12](Source1.html)^**. However, circuit modules that held the
components were somewhat interchangeable. They were plugged into one of
five interconnection

\newpageon{13}

![**Figure 1--2**. Locations of key components of the Gemini Guidance System.
(From McDonnell Corp., *Gemini Familiarization Manual*)](images/p13.jpg)

boards, and it took 510 of the modules to build the logic section
alone**^[13](Source1.html)^**. The computer had no redundant circuits,
which meant that failures in the computer canceled whatever activity
needed to be controlled by it. For example, a failure in the power
switch three quarters of the way through the Gemini IV mission caused
cancellation of the planned computer-controlled re-entry. It was
possible to fly the Gemini computer without a backup because whatever
the computer did erroneously could be either abandoned (such as
rendezvous) or handled, albeit more crudely, in other ways (such as
re-entry using Mercury procedures).

The machine had an instruction cycle of 140 milliseconds, the time it
required for an addition. Multiplication took three cycles, or
\newpageon{14} 420 milliseconds, with division requiring double that
time**^[14](Source1.html)^**. The arithmetic bit rate was 500
kilocycles, and the memory cycle rate half that**^[15](Source1.html)^**.
The computer was serial in operation, passing bits one at a time, which
explains the relatively slow processing speeds, slower than some vacuum
tube computers such as the Whirlwind. Also, its fixed decimal point
arithmetic unit design limited the precision of the calculations but
greatly reduced complexity. The Gemini digital computer used ferrite
cores for its primary memory. Core memories store one bit in each
ferrite ring by magnetizing the ring in either a clockwise or
counterclockwise direction. One direction means a one is stored and the
opposite direction is a zero. Each core is mounted at a perpendicular
crossing of two wires. Thousands of such crossings are in each core
plane, consisting of rows of wires running up and down (the x wires) and
others running left and right (the y wires). Therefore, to change the
value of a bit at a specific location, half the voltage required for the
change is sent on each of two wires, one in the x direction and one in
the y direction. This way only the core at the intersection of the two
wires is selected for change. All the others on the same wires would
have received only half the required voltage. By the use of a third wire
it is possible to "sense" whether a selected core is a one or a zero. In
this way, each individual core can be read.

The ferrite core memory in the Gemini computer had a unique design. It
consisted of 39 planes of 64 by 64-bit arrays, resulting in 4,096
addresses, each containing 39 bits. A word was considered to be 39 bits
in length, but it was divided into three syllables of 13 bits. The
memory itself divided into 18 sectors. Therefore, it was necessary to
specify sector and syllable to make a complete address. Instructions
used 13 bits of the word with data representations of 26 bits. Data
words were always stored in syllables 0 and I of a full word, but
instructions could be in any syllable. This means that up to three
instructions could be placed in any full word, but only one data item
could be in a full word**^[16](Source1.html)^**.

The arithmetic and logic circuit boards and the core memory made up the
main part of the Gemini computer. These components interfaced to a
plethora of spacecraft systems, most of which were concerned with
guidance and navigation functions. This system was the Gemini digital
computer through the Gemini VII mission. Beginning with Gemini VIII, the
computer included a secondary storage system, which had impact on the
spacecraft computer systems built by IBM and flown on the Skylab and
Shuttle.

During the 1950s and well into the 1960s, the most ubiquitous method of
providing large secondary storage for computers was the use of
high-speed, high-density magnetic tape. By 1980, tape was used mainly to
store large blocks of data unneeded on a regular basis or to mail
programs and data between sites. Disk Systems have considerably faster
access times and have rapidly increased in storage

\newpageon{15}

![**Figure 1--3**. Cores like these were used in Gemini's memory. (IBM
photo)](images/p15.jpg)

capacity, rivaling or even exceeding tape, and thus supplanting it
in common use. In 1962, disk systems were large, expensive, and far from
fully reliable. When the software for the Gemini computer threatened to
exceed the storage capacity of the core memory, IBM proposed an
Auxiliary Tape Memory to store software modules that did not need to be
in the computer at lift-off. For example, programs that provided backup
booster guidance and insertion assistance would be in the core memory
for the early part of the flight. The re-entry program could be loaded
into the core shortly before it was needed, thus writing over the
programs already there. This concept, fairly common in earth-bound
computer usage, was a first for aerospace computing.

IBM chose the Raymond Engineering Laboratory of Middletown, Connecticut
to build the device**^[17](Source1.html)^**. The unit weighed 26 pounds
and filled about 700 cubic inches of space in the adapter module of the
Gemini spacecraft**^[18](Source1.html)^**. The tape memory increased the
available storage of the Gemini computer by seven and one-half times
with its capacity of 1,170,000 bits. Programs loaded from the tape
would fill syllables 0

\newpageon{16}

![**Figure 1--4**. Layout of the Gemini Digital Computer core memory. (From
McDonnell Corp., Gemini Familiarization Manual)](images/p16.jpg)

\newpageon{17} and 1 of the core memory locations**^[19](Source1.html)^**.
It took 6 minutes to load a program from the tape drive into
core**^[20](Source1.html)^**.

NASA's natural insistence on high reliability in manned spaceflight
operations challenged the computer industry of the early 1960s. Tape
error rates were 1 bit in 100,000 and IBM wanted to raise this rate to 1
bit in 1,000,000,000**^[21](Source1.html)^**. The method used was to
triple record each program on the tape, pass each set of three
corresponding bits through a voter circuit, and send the result of the
vote to the core memory**^[22](Source1.html)^**. This scheme was later
used on the Shuttle.

Gemini VIII was the first mission with the Auxiliary Tape Memory on
board. Shortly after a successful rendezvous with an Agena, the combined
spacecraft began to spin out of control. Mission Control decided to
disengage the Agena and bring the Gemini down, as large amounts of
attitude control thruster fuel had been wasted trying to regain control
of the spacecraft. Thus, the first attempt to load a program from the
tape was made while the spacecraft was spinning. Even though the
Auxiliary Tape Memory design parameters specified low vibration
levels,**^[23](Source1.html)^** the re-entry program was successfully
loaded and used in the subsequent descent.

IBM obtained this sort of reliability beyond the original specifications
as a result of an extensive testing program. For example, the Auxiliary
Tape Memory had failed prequalification vibration tests, so IBM added a
brass flywheel and weights on the tape reels to increase
stabilization**^[24](Source1.html)^.** This ensured a successful program
load under adverse conditions. There were also problems with transistors
shorting out due to loose particles too small to be seen on x-rays but
which shook loose during acceleration**^[25](Source1.html)^**. Increased
cleanliness in manufacturing was one solution to this problem.

The only in-flight failure of a computer component was on the 48th
revolution of the Gemini IV mission, when astronaut James McDivitt tried
to update the computer in preparation for re-entry. The machine would
not turn off, and it could not be used for the planned "lifting bank"
re-entry**^[26](Source1.html)^**. IBM could not duplicate the failure on
the ground, but the manufacturers did install a manual switch that
bypassed the failure for Gemini V**^[27](Source1.html)^**.
