\newpageon{10}

Project Mercury was America's first man-in-space effort. The
McDonnell-Douglas Corporation developed the Mercury spacecraft in the
familiar bell shape. It was barely large enough for its single occupant
and had no independent maneuvering capability save attitude control
jets. Its orbital path was completely dependent on the accuracy of the
guidance of the Atlas booster rocket. Re-entry was calculated by a
realtime computing center on the ground, with retrofire times and firing
attitude transmitted to the spacecraft while in flight. Therefore, it
was unnecessary for the Mercury spacecraft to have a computer, as all
functions required for its limited flight objectives were handled by
other systems.

Gemini both continued the objectives of the Mercury program and served
as a test bed for the development of rendezvous techniques critical to
lunar missions**^[1](Source1.html)^**. At first glance, the Mercury and
Gemini spacecraft are quite similar. They share the bell shape and other
characteristics, partially because Gemini was designed as an enlarged
Mercury and because the prime contractor was the same for both craft.
The obvious difference is the presence of a second crew member and an
orbital maneuvering system attached to the rear of the main cabin. The
presence of a second crewman meant that more instrumentation could be
placed in Gemini and that more experiments could be performed, as an
extra set of eyes and hands would be available. Gemini's maneuvering
capability made it possible to practice rendezvous techniques. The main
rendezvous target was planned to be the Agena, an upper stage rocket
with a restartable liquid propellant engine that could be launched by an
Atlas booster. After rendezvous with an Agena, the Gemini would have
greatly increased maneuvering capability because it could use the rocket
on the Agena to raise its orbit.

Successful rendezvous required accurate orbital insertion, complex
catch-up maneuvering, finely tuned movements while making the final
approach to the target, and guidance during maneuvers with the Agena.
Safety during the critical powered ascent phase demanded some backup to
the ascent guidance system on the Titan II booster vehicle. The Gemini
designers also wanted to add accuracy to re-entry and to automate some
of the preflight checkout functions. These varied requirements dictated
that the spacecraft carry some sort of active, on-board computing
capability. The resulting device was the Gemini digital computer.

The Gemini computer functioned in six mission phases: prelaunch, ascent
backup, insertion, catch-up, rendezvous, and re-entry. These
requirements demanded a very reliable, fairly sophisticated digital
computer with simple crew interfaces. IBM built such a machine for the
Gemini spacecraft.

By the early 1960s, engineers were searching for ways to automate
checkout procedures and reduce the number of discrete test lines
connected to launch vehicles and spacecraft. Gemini's computer

\newpageon{11}

![**Figure 1--1**. First orbital rendezvous: Gemini VI keeps station after
using its on- board computer to maneuver to position near Gemini VII.
(NASA photo S-65-63175)](images/p11.jpg)

did its own self checks under software control during the prelaunch
phase. It also accepted parameters needed for the flight during the last
150 minutes before launch**^[2](Source1.html)^**. During ascent, the
computer received information about the velocity and course of the
booster so that it would be ready to take over from the Titan's
computers if they failed. Switch-over could either be automatic or
manual. The computer could then issue steering and booster cutoff
commands to the Titan**^[3](Source1.html)^**. Even if the updated
parameters were not necessary to boost guidance, they were useful in the
calculation of additional velocity needed after the Titan's second-stage
cutoff to achieve the proper orbit. That velocity difference was
displayed to the crew so that they could use the spacecraft's own
propulsion system to reach insertion velocity**^[4](Source1.html)^**.

\newpageon{12} Rendezvous operations required an on-board computer because
the ground tracking network did not cover all parts of the Gemini
orbital paths. Thus, it would be impossible to provide the sort of
continuous updates needed for rendezvous maneuvers. For example, Gemini
XI was planned as a first-orbit Agena rendezvous, with some of the
critical maneuvers conducted outside of telemetry
range**^[5](Source1.html)^**. That same mission also featured a fully
computer-controlled re-entry, which resulted in a splashdown 4.6
kilometers from the target**^[6](Source1.html)^**. In
computer-controlled descents, the roll attitude and rate are handled by
the computer to affect the point of touchdown and re-entry heating. The
Gemini spacecraft had sufficient lift capability to adjust the landing
point up to 500 miles on the line of flight and 40 miles laterally
respective to the line of flight. Five minutes before retrofire, the
computer was placed in re-entry mode and began to collect data. It
displayed velocity changes during and after the retrofire. During the
time the spacecraft traveled from an altitude of 400,000 feet to when it
reached 90,000 feet, the computer controlled actual
attitude**^[7](Source1.html)^**.
