### Software

\[**17**\] In 1962. hardware was still the pacing factor in computer
applications. Everything associated with computers-processors, memories
and input/output (I/O) peripherals-was expensive. Many considered
software development an incidental part of the overall applications of
computing. Specialists wrote most of the software, usually in arcane
assembly languages. FORTRAN, a high-level language, had only....

![\[**18**\] Figure 1-5. Auxiliary Tape Memory in test. (IBM
photo)](images/p18.jpg)

\[**19**\] ....been available for a few years. Although its use in
technical applications was rapidly spreading, it was still considered
too inefficient for use on computers like the Gemini digital computer.
Many thought its compiler-produced machine code to be less effective in
utilizing machine resources than machine language programs written by
humans. Experts therefore developed applications programs for Gemini
using the tiny set of 16 instructions that the computer could
execute**^[28](Source1.html)^**. This sort of programming was considered
to be more of an art than a science. Whereas the design and construction
of computer hardware followed conventional engineering principles,
software development was largely haphazard, undocumented, and highly
idiosyncratic. Many managers considered software developers to be a
different breed and best left alone. This concept of software is a myth,
and although it persists in some companies and with some people today,
by and large software is now considered as an engineered product, little
different from a rocket engine or computer.

Although the term "software engineering" did not come into common use
until 1968, programmers had applied its basic tenets to both large and
small software projects for at least 15 years. Software engineering has
evolved as programmers learned which techniques worked, which did not,
and what actually occurred in the development of software products. The
SAGE (Semi-Automatic Ground Environment) air defense
system**^[29](Source1.html)^**, the IBM 360 operating
system**^[30](Source1.html)^**, and NASA's requirements for both
spacecraft software and ground-based software were instances of major
software projects that directly contributed to the evolution of software
engineering.

Software engineers recognize that software follows a specific
development cycle, from formal specification of the product, through the
design and coding of the actual program, and then to testing of the
product and postdelivery maintenance. This cycle lasts for many years in
the case of programs such as operating systems, or a short period of
time in the case of specialized, single-use programs. During this
development process, strict standards of documentation, configuration
control, and managing changes and the correction of errors must be
maintained. Also, breaking down the application into smaller,
potentially interchangeable parts, or modules, is a primary technique.
Communication between programming teams working on different but
interconnected modules must be kept clear and unambiguous. It is in
these areas that NASA has had the greatest impact on software
engineering.

Development of the Gemini software was a learning experience for both
NASA and IBM. It was, of course, the first on-board software for a
manned spacecraft and was certainly a more sophisticated system than any
that had flown on unmanned spacecraft to that point. When the time came
to write the software for Gemini, programmers envisioned a single
software load containing all the code for the flight, \[**20**\] with
new unique programs to be developed for each
mission**^[31](Source1.html)^** . Soon it became obvious that certain
parts of the program were relatively unchanged from mission to mission,
such as the ascent guidance backup. Designers then introduced
modularization, with some modules becoming parts of several software
loads.

Another reason for modularization is the fact that the programs
developed for Gemini quickly exceeded the memory available for them.
Some were stored on the Auxiliary Tape Memory until needed. The problem
of poor estimation of total memory requirements has plagued each manned
spacecraft computer system. In the case of Gemini, changed requirements
and attempts to squeeze the programs into the allotted space resulted in
nine different versions of the software**^[32](Source1.html)^**. The
different versions were referred to by the name "Gemini Math Flow."

Tracing the development of the math flows shows how identifying new
functions caused initial memory estimates to be wrong and how the
project handled changes. Math Flow One consisted of just four modules:
Ascent, Catch-up, Rendezvous, and Re-entry. Math Flow Two was proposed
to add orbital navigation and re-entry initialization, but it caused the
overall load to exceed the memory size and the Gemini program office
canceled the additions**^[33](Source1.html)^**. This version of the
software flew on spacecraft II in January 1965. By Math Flow Four, the
re-entry initialization program had been successfully added, but the
load took up 12,150 of 12,288 available words. The plan had been to use
this program on spacecraft III and others, but a NASA directive of
February, 1964 changed the guidance logic of the re-entry mode to a
constant bank angle rather than a proportional bank angle and constant
roll rate. Math Flow Five incorporated this change, but it filled the
memory and was scrubbed in favor of a modified Math Flow Three on
spacecraft III and IV, followed by Math Flow Six containing some changes
on spacecraft V through VII**^[34](Source1.html)^**. The final version,
Math Flow Seven, was used on spacecraft VIII through XII, all of which
incorporated the Auxiliary Tape Memory. It had six program modules with
nine operational modes. The six program modules of Math Flow Seven were
Executor, Prelaunch, Ascent, Catch-Up, Rendezvous, and
Re-Entry**^[35](Source1.html)^**. The Executor routine selected other
routines depending upon mission phases.

The specification procedure for the software required McDonnell-Douglas
to prepare the Specification Control Document (SCD). This was forwarded
to the IBM Space Guidance Center in Owego, which developed a FORTRAN
program to validate the guidance equations. The use of simulations such
as the FORTRAN program was endemic to the Gemini software effort and was
later applied to software development for other spacecraft computers.

Gemini used three levels of simulations, beginning with the
equation-validation system. The second was a man-in-the-loop \[**21**\]
simulation to help define 1/0 requirements, procedures, and displays.
The third level was a refined digital simulation to determine the
performance characteristics of the software, useful in error analysis.
This third level was carried out in the Configuration Control Test
System (CCTS) laboratory, which contained a Gemini computer and crew
interfaces. This Mission Verification Simulation (MVS) ensured that the
guidance system worked with the operational mission program. Further
tests of the software were done at McDonnell-Douglas and at the
pad**^[36](Source1.html)^**. NASA and IBM emphasized program
verification because there was no backup computer or backup software.
The verification process and the tools developed for it were later
applied to military projects in which IBM became
involved**^[37](Source1.html)^**.

Even if the software is perfect, errors may occur because of transient
hardware or software failures during operation due to power fluctuations
or unforeseen demands on real-time programs. Some of these can be
spotted by diagnostic subroutines interleaved in the software and used
for fault detection**^[38](Source1.html)^**. Such routines were put in
the Gemini software and are now a part of all IBM computer systems.

The software produced during the Gemini program was highly reliable and
successful. Techniques of specification development, verification, and
simulations developed for Gemini were later applied to other IBM and
NASA projects. NASA was certainly better prepared to monitor software
development for the much more difficult Apollo program.
