\pagebreakon{28}

### The need for an on-board computer

The Apollo lunar landing program presented a tremendous
managerial and technical challenge to NASA. Navigating from the earth to
the moon and the need for a certain amount of spacecraft autonomy
dictated the use of a computer to assist in solving the navigation,
guidance, and flight control problems inherent in such missions. Before
President John F. Kennedy publicly committed the United States to a
"national goal" of landing a man on the moon, it was necessary to
determine the feasibility of guiding a spacecraft to a landing from a
quarter of a million miles away. The availability of a capable computer
was a key factor in making that determination.

The Instrumentation Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) had been working on small computers for aerospace use
since the late 1950s. Dr. Raymond Alonso designed such a device in
1958--1959**^[1](Source2.html)^**. Soon after, Eldon Hall designed a
computer for an unmanned mission to photograph Mars and
return**^[2](Source2.html)^**. That computer could be interfaced with
both inertial and optical sensors. In addition, MIT was gaining
practical experience as the prime contractor for the guidance system of
the Polaris missile. In early 1961, Robert G. Chilton at NASA-Langley
Space Center and Milton Trageser at MIT set the basic configuration for
the Apollo guidance system**^[3](Source2.html)^**. An on-board digital
computer was part of the design. The existence of these preliminary
studies and the confidence of C. Stark Draper, then director of the
Instrumentation Lab that now bears his name, contributed to NASA's
belief that the lunar landing program was possible from the guidance
standpoint.

The presence of a computer in the Apollo spacecraft was justified for
several reasons. Three were given early in the program: *(a)* to avoid
hostile jamming, *(b)* to prepare for later long-duration (planetary)
manned missions, and *(c)* to prevent saturation of ground stations in the
event of multiple missions in space
simultaneously**^[4](Source2.html)^**. Yet none of these became a
primary justification. Rather, it was the reality of physics expressed
in the 1.5-second time delay in a signal path from the earth to the moon
and back that provided the motivation for a computer in the lunar
landing vehicle. With the dangerous landing conditions that were
expected, which would require quick decision making and feedback, NASA
wanted less reliance on ground-based computing**^[5](Source2.html)^**.
The choice, later in the program, of the lunar orbit rendezvous method
over direct flight to the moon, further justified an on-board computer
since the lunar orbit insertion would take place on the far side of the
moon, out of contact with the earth**^[6](Source2.html)^**. These
considerations and the consensus among MIT people that autonomy was
desirable ensured the place of a computer in the Apollo vehicle.

Despite the apparent desire for autonomy expressed early in the
\pagebreakon{29} program, as the mission profile was refined and the realities
of building the actual spacecraft and planning for its use became more
immediate, the role of the computer changed. The ground computers became
the prime determiners of the vehicle's position in three-dimensional
space "at all times" (except during maneuvers) in the
missions**^[7](Source2.html)^**. Planners even decided to calculate the
lunar orbit insertion burn on the ground and then transmit the solution
to the spacecraft computer, which somewhat negated one of the reasons
for having it. Ultimately, the actual Apollo spacecraft was only
autonomous in the sense it could return safely to earth without help
from the ground**^[8](Source2.html)^**.

Even with its autonomous role reduced, the Apollo on-board computer
system was integrated so fully into the spacecraft that designers called
it "the fourth crew member"**^[9](Source2.html)^**. Not only did it have
navigation functions, but also system management functions governing the
guidance and navigation components. It served as the primary source of
timing signals for 20 spacecraft systems**^[10](Source2.html)^**. The
Apollo computer system did not have as long a list of responsibilities
as later spacecraft computers, but it still handled a large number of
tasks and was the object of constant attention from the crew.
