\newpageon{59}

### The Abort Guidance System

The computer in the Abort Guidance System (AGS) is probably
the most obscure computing machine in the manned spaceflight program to
date. The 330-page "Apollo Spacecraft News Reference" prepared for the
first lunar landing mission does not contain a single reference to it,
compared with several pages of description of the Primary Guidance,
Navigation, and Control System (PGNCS) computer and its interfaces. The
invisibility of the AGS is a tribute to PGNCS, since the AGS was never
needed to abort a landing. It was, however, an interesting and
pioneering system in its own right.

The AGS owed its existence to NASA's abort policy; an abort is ordered
if one additional system failure would potentially cause loss of
crew**^[160](Source2.html)^**. Hence, the failure of either the PGNCS or
the AGS would have resulted in an abort. The AGS operated in an open
loop, parallel to the PGNCS in the LEM, and gave the crew an independent
source of position, velocity, attitude, and steering
information**^[161](Source2.html)^**. It could verify navigation data
during the periods when the LEM was behind the moon and blacked out from
ground control. The Apollo program first exercised this capability
during Apollo 9 and Apollo 10 leading up to the first landing
mission**^[162](Source2.html)^**.

The AGS was a pioneer in that it was the first "strapped-down" guidance
system. The system used sensors fixed to the LEM to determine motion
rather than a stable platform as in conventional inertial guidance
systems**^[163](Source2.html)^**. The entire system occupied only 3
cubic feet and consisted of three major components: (a) an Abort
Electronic Assembly (AEA), which was the computer, (b) an Abort Sensor
Assembly (ASA), which was the inertial sensor, and (c) a Data Entry and
Display Assembly (DEDA), which was the DSKY for the AGS.

#### AEA and DEDA: The Computer Hardware

As with the PGNCS computer, the AGS computer went through an
evolutionary period in which designers clarified and settled the
requirements. The first design for the system did not include a true
computer at all but rather a "programmer," a fairly straightforward
sequencer of about 2,000 words fixed memory, which did not have
navigation functions. Its job was simply to abort the LEM to a "clear"
lunar orbit (one that would be higher than any mountain ranges) at which
point the crew would wait for rescue from the CM, with its more
sophisticated navigation and maneuvering
system**^[164](Source2.html)^.** The requirements changed in the fall of
1964. To provide more autonomy and safety, the AGS had to provide
rendezvous capability without outside \[**60**\] sources of
information**^[165](Source2.html)^**. TRW, the contractor, then decided
to include a computer of about 4,000 words memory. The company
considered an existing Univector accumulation machine but, instead,
chose a custom designed computer**^[166](Source2.html)^**.

The computer built for the AGS was the MARCO 4418 (for Man Rated
Computer). It was an 18-bit machine, with 17 magnitude bits and a sign
bit. It used 5-bit op codes and 13-bit addresses. Numbers were stored in
the two's complement form, fixed point, same as in the primary computer.
Twenty-seven instructions were available, and the execution time varied
from 10 to 70 microseconds, depending on the instruction being
performed**^[167](Source2.html)^**. The computer was 5 by 8 by 23.75
inches, weighed 32.7 pounds, and required 90
watts**^[168](Source2.html)^**. The memory was bit serial access, which
made it slower than the PGNCS computer, and it was divided into 2K of
fixed cores and 2K of erasable cores**^[169](Source2.html)^**. The
actual cores used in the fixed and erasable portions were of the same
construction, unlike those in the PGNCS computer. Therefore, the ratio
of fixed memory to erasable in the MARCO 4418 was
variable**^[170](Source2.html)^**. TRW was obviously thinking in terms
of adaptability to later applications.

The DEDA was much smaller and less versatile than the DSKY. It was 5.5
by 6 by 5.19 inches and was located on the right side of the LEM control
panel in front of the pilot, about waist
height**^[171](Source2.html)^**. Sixteen pushbutton keys were available:
CLEAR, READOUT, ENTER, HOLD, PLUS, MINUS, and the digits 0-9. It had a
single, nine-window readout display. Three windows showed the address
(in octal), one window the sign, and five,
digits**^[172](Source2.html)^**. This was similar to the readout in the
Gemini spacecraft for its computer.

#### Software for the AGS

Since hardware in the AGS evolved as in PGNCS, software also had to be
"scrubbed" (reduced in size) in the AGS. Mirroring the memory problems
of PGNCS, by 1966, 2 full years before the first active mission using
the LEM, only 20 words remained of the 4,000 in the AGS
memory**^[173](Source2.html)^**. Careful memory management, became the
focus of TRW and NASA. Tindall recalled that the changes all had to be
made in the erasable portion, as the fixed portion was programmed early
and remained set to save money. However, changing the erasable memory
turned out to be very expensive and a real headache, the developers
fighting to free up storage literally one location at a
time**^[174](Source2.html)^**. Also, some software decisions had to be
altered in light of possible disastrous effects. The restart program for
the PGNCS has been described. In it, a restart clears all engine burns.
The first versions of the AGS software also caused engine shutdown and
an \[**61**\] attitude hold to go into effect when a restart occurred.
This would be potentially dangerous if a restart began with the LEM
close to the lunar surface. The solution was to give the crew
responsibility to manually fire the engines during a restart if
necessary**^[175](Source2.html)^**.

Software development for the AGS followed a tightly controlled schedule:

1. 12.5 months before launch: NASA delivers the preliminary reference
trajectory and mission requirements to TRW.
2. 11 months: Program specification and AGS performance analysis is
complete.
3. 10.5 months: NASA conducts the Critical Design Review (CDR).
4. 8 months: The final mission reference trajectory is delivered.
5. 7 months: The equation test results, verification test plan, and
preliminary program goes to NASA for approval.
6. 6.5 months: The First Article Configuration Inspection (FACI)
conducted.
7. 5 months: The verified program and documentation is delivered to
NASA.
8. 4.5 months: NASA conducts the Customer Acceptance Readiness Review
(CARR).
9. 3 months: The operational flight trajectory is delivered by NASA to
the contractor.
10. 2 months: The final Flight Readiness Review (FRR) is held.
11. 1.5 months: The tape containing the final program is
delivered**^[176](Source2.html)^**.

One method of software verification was quite unique. To simulate motion
and thus provide more realistic inputs to the computer, planners used a
walk-in van containing the hardware and software. Technicians drove the
van around Houston with the programs running inside
it**^[177](Source2.html)^**.

\newpageon{62}

#### Use of the AGS

The AGS was never used for an abort, but it did contribute to
the final rendezvous and docking with the CM on the Apollo 11 mission,
probably to avoid the problems encountered with the rendezvous radar
during landing**^[178](Source2.html)^**. It did monitor PGNCS
performance during all missions in which it flew. The only criticism of
its performance was from astronaut John Young, who remarked that "one
mistake in a rendezvous, and the whole thing
quit"**^[179](Source2.html)^**. Apparently, restarts occurred as part of
the recovery from some operator errors. The AGS was actually like a
parachute-absolutely necessary, but presumably never needed.
