\newpageon{29}

### MIT chosen as hardware and software contractor

On August 9,1961, NASA contracted with the MIT
Instrumentation Lab for the design, development, and construction of the
Apollo guidance and navigation system, including software. The project
manager for this effort was Milton Trageser, and David Hoag was the
technical director**^[11](Source2.html)^**. MIT personnel generally
agree that they were chosen because their work on Polaris proved that
they could handle time, weight, and performance restrictions and because
of their previous work in space navigation**^[12](Source2.html)^**. In
fact, the Polaris team was moved almost intact to
Apollo**^[13](Source2.html)^**. Despite their experience with aerospace
computers, the Apollo project turned out to be a genuine challenge for
them. As there were no fixed specifications when the contract was
signed, not until late 1962 did MIT have a good idea of Apollo's
requirements**^[14](Source2.html)^**. One of the MIT people later
recalled that

> If the designers had known then \[1961\] what they learned later, or had
> a complete set of specifications been available...they would probably
> have concluded that there was no solution with the technology of the
> early 1960s**^[15](Source2.html)^**.

Fortunately, the technology improved, and the concepts of computer
Science applied to the problem also advanced as MIT developed the
system.

\newpageon{30} NASA's relationship with MIT also proved to be educational.
The Apollo computer system was one of NASA's first real-time, large
scale software application contracts**^[16](Source2.html)^**. Managing
such a project was completely outside the NASA experience. A short time
after making the Apollo guidance contract, NASA became involved in
developing the on-board software for Gemini (a much smaller and more
controllable enterprise) and the software for the Integrated Mission
Control Center. Different teams that started within the Space Task
Group, later as part of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, managed
these projects with little interaction until the mid-1960s, when the two
Gemini systems approached successful completion and serious problems
remained with the Apollo software. Designers borrowed some concepts to
assist the Apollo project. In general, NASA personnel involved with
developing the Apollo software were in the same virgin territory as were
MIT designers. They were to learn together the principles of software
engineering as applied to real-time problems.
