### Lessons

\[**62**\] What did NASA learn from its experiences with the Apollo
computer system? At the management level, NASA learned to assign
experienced personnel to a project early, rather than using the start of
a project for training inexperienced personnel; many NASA managers of
software and hardware were learning on the job while in key positions.
Also, more participation by management in the early phases of software
design is necessary so that costs can be more effectively estimated and
controlled.

From the standpoint of development, NASA learned that a more thorough,
early effort at total systems engineering must be made so that
specifications can be adequately set. NASA contractors in the Apollo
program faced changing specifications long after final requirements
should have been fixed. This was expensive and caused such problems as
Raytheon's retooling, memory shortages, and design insufficiencies.

The realization that software is more difficult to develop than hardware
is one of the most important lessons of the Apollo program. So the
choice of memory should be software driven, and designers should develop
software needed for manned spaceflight near the Manned Spacecraft
Center. The arrangement with MIT reduced overall quality and efficiency
due to lack of communication. Also, more modularization of the software
was needed**^[180](Source2.html)^**.

The AGC system served well on the earth-orbital missions, the six lunar
landing missions, the three Skylab missions, and the Apollo-Soyuz test
project. Even though plans existed to expand the computer to 16K of
erasable memory and 65K of fixed memory, including making direct memory
addressing possible for the erasable portion, no expansion
occurred**^[181](Source2.html)^**. The Apollo computer did fly on
missions other than Apollo. An F-8 research aircraft used a lunar module
computer as part of a "fly-by-wire" system, in which control
\[**63**\] surfaces moved by servos at the direction of electronic
signals instead of traditional cables and hydraulics. In that way, the
Apollo system made a direct research contribution to the Shuttle, which
is completely a fly-by-wire craft. The most important legacy of the AGC,
however, was in the way NASA applied the lessons it was beginning to
learn in developing ground software to the management of flight
software.
