### Conclusions

The Skylab program demonstrated that careful management of
software development, including strict control of changes, extensive and
preplanned verification, and the use of adequate development tools,
results in quality software with high reliability. Attention to piece
part quality in hardware development and the use of redundancy resulted
in reliable computers. However, it must be stressed that part of the
success of the software management and the hardware development was due
to the small size of both. Few programmers were involved in initial
program design and writing. This meant that communications between
programmers and teams were relatively minimal. The fact that IBM
produced just 10 computers and really needed to ensure the success of
just 2 of those helped in focusing the quality assurance effort expended
on the hardware.

\pagebreakon{83} What happened after the manned Skylab program demonstrated
the need for foresight and proper attention to storage of
mission-critical materials until any possibility of their use had gone
away. The dispersal of the verification hardware is understandable, as
it is expensive to maintain. However, some provision should have been
made for retaining mission-unique capabilities such as actual flight
hardware. The destruction of the flight tapes and source code for the
software by unknown parties was inexcusable. A single high-density disk
pack could have held all relevant material.

Skylab marked the beginning of redundant computer hardware on manned
spacecraft. It was also the first project that developed software with
awareness of proper engineering principles. The Shuttle continued both
these concepts but on a much larger and more complex scale.
