\pagebreakon{66}

Skylab, America's first orbital workshop, carried a highly
successful computer system. For much of the operating life of the space
station, the computer was not just the fourth crew member but the only
crew member. It made a large contribution to saving the mission during
the 2 weeks after the troubled launch and later helped control Skylab
during the last year before re-entry. The entire system functioned
without error or failure for over 600 days of operation, even after a
4-year and 30-day interruption. It is significant as the first
spaceborne computer system to have redundancy management software. The
software development for the system followed strict engineering
principles, producing a fully verified and reliable real-time program.

The record of the computer system stands in contrast to that of the
workshop itself. NASA launched Skylab on May 14, 1973 on a Saturn V
booster. The first two stages put the modified S-IVB third stage into
orbit. The S-IVB contained the workshop, which included a solar
telescope mount and living and working quarters. The plan was to launch
the first crew the next day aboard a Saturn IB carrying an Apollo
command and service module. However, shortly after achieving orbit,
telemetry from the unmanned Skylab indicated that one of the two wings
of solar panels was missing and the other had not deployed. The panels
on the Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM) had opened properly but they were
too small to supply power for the whole workshop. In addition, the gyros
were drifting and the thermal shield was damaged. These failures caused
concern that the interior of the space station would overheat and
destroy the equipment. The damage was so serious that for the first 3 or
4 hours the ground controllers felt that NASA would be fortunate if the
systems were to function for 1 day^[1](#source3)^. However, by
using the computer system that controlled the workshop's attitude, the
ground controllers were able to keep the Skylab at angles to the sun
such that the equipment would be exposed to tolerable temperatures in
the laboratory in concert with generating adequate power from the
remaining solar panels. At times these were conflicting requirements.
This had to be done for 2 weeks while engineers prepared repair
materials for the crew to fix the workshop. Controller Steven Bales
remembered that time as "the hardest 2 weeks I have ever spent," since a
24-hour watch had to be maintained on the attitude and
temperature^[2](#source3)^.

The computer system again served as "captain" during the entire Skylab
reactivation. The workshop systems were shut down on February 9, 1974,
after the last crew left. NASA expected that the Skylab would stay in
orbit until the mid-1980s. By that time the Space Shuttle would be
operational and, it was thought, could be used to bring up rockets to
boost the laboratory into a higher orbit. However, unexpected solar
activity in the mid-1970s resulted in an increase in the density of the
atmosphere, so the Skylab's orbit decayed at a much faster rate than
projected^[3](#source3)^.

\pagebreakon{67}

![**Figure 3--1**. Skylab in orbit. Note the foil sun shield above the center
section and the missing large solar panel. The Apollo Telescope Mount is
the section with the "windmill" solar panels.
(NASA photo 74-H-98)](images/p67.jpg)

By 1978, the predicted re-entry time was to be late that year or in
early 1979. NASA decided to attempt to change the attitude of the
workshop so that minimal drag would ensue. In this way, the orbit might
be maintained until the Shuttle could rescue the space station.
Engineers reactivated and reprogrammed the computer to maintain the
proper attitude and, later, to control the re-entry when NASA abandoned
the attempt to maintain orbit. They accomplished this over 4 years after
the computer was shutdown.

The need for the computer system that served Skylab so well was not
apparent until the original "wet workshop" concept (the laboratory to be
assembled in space inside of the empty propellant tanks of the last
stage of the launch vehicle) had progressed through more sophisticated
designs to the eventual "dry workshop"^[4](#source3)^. In
December 1968, NASA decided to acquire a dual computer system to help
control attitude while in orbit^[5](#source3)^. Attitude control
was crucial to the success of the solar experiments. In fact, the name
of the computer reflects this: Apollo Telescope Mount Digital Computer
(ATMDC). Two of these computers were a part of the Skylab Attitude and
Pointing Control System (APCS), which consisted of a number of other
components, \pagebreakon{68} such as an interface unit, magnetic tape memory,
control moment gyros, the thrustor attitude control system, sun sensors,
a star tracker, and nine rate gyros^[6](#source3)^.

Marshall Space Flight Center devised this complex system-a pioneering
effort because it represents the first fully digital control system on a
manned spacecraft^[7](#source3)^. Its mission-critical status
led to the use of extensive redundancy in its design, in both hardware
and software. The computer system not only managed its own redundancy,
but all redundant hardware on the spacecraft^[8](#source3)^. The
uniqueness and complexity of the control laws associated with the
control moment gyro attitude system led one NASA engineer to refer to it
as "a crazy animal"^[9](#source3)^. It was up to the Skylab
computer system to tame it.
