\newpageon{79}

### User Interfaces

NASA and IBM designed the computer system to operate
autonomously. One crewman reported "not much interaction" with the
system at all**^[62](Source3.html)^**, but the capability was present
for significant activity if needed**^[63](Source3.html)^**. The crew
could enter data and actually make changes in the software through a
keyboard located in the DAS on the ATM Control and Display Console.

The DAS had only 10 keys and a three-position switch. The keys were the
digits 0-7 (all entries were in octal), a clear key, and an enter key.
The switch could select either power bus one or two, or be off. Above
the DAS was an "Orbit Phase" panel containing a digital readout of
minutes and seconds to the next orbital benchmark. When the first
keystroke of a five-digit command was made, the uplink DCS commands were
inhibited, and the time remaining clock inputs were inhibited, so that
the clock digits could be used for displaying the keystrokes. In that
mode, five digits would be lit instead of four. The remaining four
keystrokes were the data/command inputs**^[64](Source3.html)^**. The
display of the keystrokes represented an echo. If the sequence was
correct, the astronaut pressed the enter key, or else he would restart
the input process. Pressing the clear key brought back the digital
clock. The rather limited nature of this command system indicates that
it was intended for sparing use.

Besides the DAS, one other switch on the control panel related to the
computer system. In the "Attitude Control" area of the panel was a
three-position switch that controlled which computer was in actual use.
It could be set for automatic (and usually was), in which case the
redundancy management software would take care of matters. Alternately,
the crew could purposely select either the primary or secondary
computer. If either of these was selected, then automatic changeover was
inhibited**^[65](Source3.html)^**. The switch gave the crew protection
from

\newpageon{80}

![Figure 3-5. Dr. Edward Gibson at the Apollo Telescope Mount Control
console. The interface to the digital computer is at lower left, on the
panel immediately above the coil of cable. (NASA photo
4-60352)](images/p80.jpg)

\newpageon{81} .....failure of the redundancy management software.
Incidentally, the switch was not a common three-position toggle switch
but, instead, required the crew to pull out and rotate the post. This
protected the crew from accidental switching.
