\newpageon{68}

### Hardware

The choice of a central processor for the Skylab computer
system marked a break from NASA's previous practice. The Gemini and
Apollo computer systems were custom-built processors. Apollo did have an
immediate predecessor, but the number of changes necessary before flight
negated most of its resemblance to the Polaris system. To the contrary,
Skylab and, later, the Shuttle, used "off-the-shelf" IBM 4Pi series
processors, though they both needed the addition of a customized I/O
system, a simpler and necessarily idiosyncratic component. By using
existing computers, NASA avoided the serious problems associated with
man-rating a new system encountered during the Apollo program.

The 4Pi descended directly from the System 360 architecture IBM
developed in the early 1960s. Some 4Pis were at work in aircraft by the
latter part of that decade. The top-of-the-line 4Pi is the AP-101,
eventually used in the F-15, B-52, and Shuttle. The version on board
Skylab was the TC-l, which used a 16-bit word, in contrast to the
AP-101's 32 bits. A TC-l processor, an interface controller, an I/O
assembly, and a power supply made up an ATMDC**^[10](Source3.html)^**.
Each flight computer had a memory of 16,384
words**^[11](Source3.html)^**. This memory was a destructive readout
core memory, which means that the bits were erased as they were read and
that the memory location had to be refreshed with the contents of a
buffer register, which saved a copy of the bits before they were passed
on to the processor. The memory was in two modules of 8K words
each**^[12](Source3.html)^**. Addressing ranged from 0 to 8K, with a
hardware switch determining which module was being
accessed**^[13](Source3.html)^**. The redundant computer system was
composed of two processors attached to a single Workshop Computer
Interface Unit. The unit consisted of two I/O sections (one for each
computer), a common section, and a power supply**^[14](Source3.html)^**.
Only the I/O section connected to the active \[**69**\] computer was
powered. The inactive computer and its I/O section of the interface unit
were not powered. The common section contained a 64-bit transfer
register and timer associated with redundancy
management**^[15](Source3.html)^**. The transfer register and timer were
the only parts of Skylab that consisted of triple modular redundant
(TMR) circuits**^[16](Source3.html)^**. Basically, TMR circuits sent
signals in triplicate on separate channels and then voted. The single
output from a TMR voter represented either two or three identical
inputs.

The final component of the computer subsystem was the Memory Load Unit.
The original design did not contain one, but, like the Gemini Auxiliary
Tape Memory, engineers later added it. Whereas the Gemini tape unit was
useful in handling memory overloads, designers included the Skylab tape
unit to further increase the reliability of the system. It carried a 16K
software load and an 8K load that could be written into either module of
either memory of the ATDCs. If up to three modules failed, the mission
could continue with reduced capabilities with an 8K program loaded into
the remaining module. This raised the total reliability of the system
from a factor of 0.87 to 0.97**^[17](Source3.html)^**. The tape load
would take a maximum of 11 seconds**^[18](Source3.html)^**.

NASA decided to add the Memory Load Unit in the summer of 1971, when
both IBM and Marshall realized that a Borg-Warner tape unit, like the
two already used as telemetry recorders, could be upgraded for program
storage. IBM imposed some manufacturing changes on the recorders
(primarily piece part screening) to make the process more nearly match
the care taken in constructing the computers**^[19](Source3.html)^**.

NASA awarded the contract for the computer system to IBM on March 5,
1969**^[20](Source3.html)^**. By October, designers froze the choice of
processors and their configuration, a decision heavily influenced by the
concern for redundancy and reliability**^[21](Source3.html)^**. The
first computer was delivered on December 23, 1969. IBM eventually built
10, the final 2 being the flight versions, which went to NASA on
February 11, 1972, over a year before launch. Two of the ATMDCs and an
interface unit were turned over to IBM for use in testing both hardware
and software, ensuring that the final verification would be on actual
equipment rather than simulators**^[22](Source3.html)^**.

IBM took great pride in delivering on time without sacrificing
reliability. In applying Saturn development techniques to the Skylab
equipment, for example, IBM required all piece parts to exceed expected
stress levels**^[23](Source3.html)^**, and prepared the ATMDC for
thermal conditions, the most dangerous stress to electronic
components**^[24](Source3.html)^**. A number of design problems,
including thermal and vibration difficulties, analog conversion
inaccuracies, and interconnection failures, had to be
overcome**^[25](Source3.html)^**. To make up time lost handling these
problems, IBM sometimes went to a 7-day, three-shift debugging
cycle**^[26](Source3.html)^**.

\newpageon{70}

![Figure 3-2. The concept of Triple Modular Redundancy.](images/p70.jpg)

\newpageon{71}

![Figure 3-3. A block diagram of the Skylab Computer System with the
dual ATMDCs, tape memory, and common section shown. (From IBM, Skylab
Operation Assessment, ATMDC, 1974)](images/p71.jpg)

Probably due to the care taken in manufacture, the computer system had
no failures. A planned ground-initiated switch-over from the primary to
the secondary computer occurred after 630 hours of orbital operations.
The second computer then ran the remainder of the 271-day
mission**^[27](Source3.html)^**. On the final day, the system did
another switch-over and used the tape unit for the first time, primarily
to prove that it would work. A transmission of software from the ground
to the computer was also practiced. IBM's reports of the performance of
the hardware are quite self-congratulatory but, based on the actual
record, justified.
