### The Reactivation Mission

The Skylab Reactivation Mission represents one of the most
interesting examples of the autonomy and reliability of manned
spacecraft computers. The original Skylab mission lasted 272 days with
long unmanned periods. The reactivation mission, flown entirely under
computer control, lasted 393 days. Therefore, the bulk of the activated
life of the space laboratory fully depended on the ATMDCs.

When it was obvious that the Workshop was going to fall to the earth
long before a rescue mission could be launched, NASA began studying
methods of prolonging the orbital life of the spacecraft. Even though
the atmosphere is very thin at the altitude Skylab was flying, the drag
produced on the spacecraft was highly related to its attitude with
respect to its direction of flight (velocity vector). During most of the
manned mission periods Skylab flew in solar inertial (SI) mode, in which
the lab was kept perpendicular to the sun to provide maximum exposure
for the solar collectors. Momentum desaturation maneuvers were done on
the dark side of the earth to compensate for bias momentum buildup
resulting from noncyclic torques acting on the spacecraft. The SI mode
was high drag, so engineers devised two new modes,
end-on-velocity-vector (EOVV) and torque equilibrium attitude (TEA).
EOVV pointed the narrow end of the lab in the direction of flight,
minimizing the aerodynamic drag on the vehicle. TEA could control the
re-entry, using the gravity gradient and gyroscopic torques to
counterbalance the aerodynamic torque. Only in this way could the
Workshop be controlled below 140 nautical miles
altitude^[66](Source3.html)^.

Use of the new modes required that they be coded and transmitted to the
computers in orbit. First it was necessary to discover whether or not
the computers still functioned. Since the ATMDC used destructive readout
core memories, there was some concern that the software might have been
destroyed during restart tests if the refreshment hardware had failed.
On March 6, 1978, NASA engineers at the Bermuda tracking station ordered
portions of Skylab to activate. On March 11, the ATMDC powered up for 5
minutes to obtain telemetry confirmation that it was still functioning.
The software resumed the program cycle where it had left off 4 years and
30 days earlier. As far as the computer was concerned, it had suffered a
temporary power transient^[67](Source3.html)^!

When IBM began to make preparations to modify the software, it
discovered that there was almost nothing with which to work. The
\pagebreakon{82} carefully constructed tools used in the original software
effort were dispersed beyond recall, and, worse yet, the last of the
source code for the flight programs had been deleted just weeks
beforehand. This meant that changes to the software would have to be
hand coded in hexadecimal, as the assembler could not be used-a risky
venture in terms of ensuring accuracy. Eventually it became necessary to
repunch the 2,516 cards of a listing of the most recent flight program,
and IBM hired a subcontractor for the purpose^[68](Source3.html)^.

Engineers could not test this software with the same high fidelity as
during the original development. They abandoned plans for real time
simulations because they could not find enough parts of any of the
original simulators. Interpretive simulation could be performed because
the tapes for that form of testing had been saved. However, the
interpretive simulator ran 20 times slower than real time, so less
testing was possible^[69](Source3.html)^.

IBM approached the modification using the same principles as in the
original production. The baseline software for the reactivation was
Flight Program 80, including change request 3091, which was already in
the second computer. Software changes for reactivation were simply
handled as routine change requests. They placed the EOVV software in
memory previously occupied by experiment calibration and other functions
useless in the new mission. TEA replaced the command and display
software^[70](Source3.html)^.

When the software was ready for flight, NASA uplinked it to a reserve
area of memory and then downlinked and manually verified it. If it
passed the verification, engineers gave a command to activate it. The
reprogramming was generally successful. The four people assigned to the
software revision maintained IBM's record of quality throughout the
reactivation mission^[71](Source3.html)^.
