### The DPS hardware configuration

The DPS hardware in the shuttle avionics system consists of
four major components: general-purpose computers, the data bus network,
the multifunction cathode ray tube display system, and the mass memory
units. Each is a substantial improvement over similar systems in any
previous spacecraft. Together, they are a model for future avionics
developments.

#### General-Purpose Computers

NASA uses five general-purpose computers in the Shuttle. Each one is an
IBM AP-101 central processing unit (CPU) coupled with a custom-built
input/output processor (IOP). The AP-101 has the same type of registers
and architecture used in the IBM System 360 and throughout the 4Pi
series^[29](Source4.html)^. IBM announced the 4Pi in 1966, so by the
early 1970s, when Shuttle procurement was complete, the machine had had
extensive operational use^[30](Source4.html)^. The AP-101 version,
which is an upgraded AP-1, has since been used in the B-52 and B-1B
military aircraft and the F-8 digital fly-by-wire experimental aircraft.
The central processor in each case is the same, but the IOP is adapted
to the particular application.

Although one of the reasons for choosing the AP-101 was its familiar
instruction set, some modifications were necessary for the Shuttle
version. Since the execution of instructions is dependent on microcode,
rather than hardware only, the instruction set could be changed
somewhat. Microcode is a set of primitives that can be combined to
create new logic paths in the hardware. The AP-101 has room for up to
2,048 microinstructions, 48 bits in length^[31](Source4.html)^.

\pagebreakon{94}

![**Figure 4--2**. A block diagram of the hardware that makes up the Shuttle
Data Processing System. The fifth computer is the Backup Flight System
computer.](images/p94.jpg)

\pagebreakon{95}

<div class="inbox">Box 4-1: IBM AP-101 Central Processor and Memory Hardware

Shuttle computers make extensive use of standard ICs. The AP-101 is
built using transistor-transistor logic (TTL) semiconductor circuits as
the basic building block. The TTL gates are arranged in medium-scale
integration (MSI) and large-scale integration (LSI)
configurations^[32](Source4.html)^. The circuits are on boards that
can be interchanged as units.

The AP-101 uses a variety of word sizes. Instructions can be either 16
or 32 bits in length. Fixed-point arithmetic, done using fractional
numbers stored in two's complement form, also uses 16- and 32-bit
lengths. Floating-point arithmetic is done with 32-, 40- and 64-bit
words, although the latter are limited to addition and
subtraction^[33](Source4.html)^. Instructions using floating-point
take longer to execute than fixed-point arithmetic, and adding is still
faster than multiplying; but average speed for the machine is 480,000
instructions per second, compared with 7,000 instructions per second in
the Gemini computer^[34](Source4.html)^.

The CPU registers are in three groups. Two sets of eight 32-bit
registers are available for fixed-point arithmetic. One set of eight
32-bit registers is for floating point
operations^[35](Source4.html)^. Semiconductor memories are used in
the registers instead of discrete components. As a result, the registers
are faster than those used on Gemini and Apollo and, since they are
available in large sets, can be used to store intermediate results of
calculations without having to access core memory. Thus, processing is
accelerated and achieves the performance noted
above^[36](Source4.html)^.

A program status word (PSW), 64 bits in length, is used to help control
interrupts. The PSW contains information such as the next instruction
address, current condition code, and any system masks for
interrupts^[37](Source4.html)^. It has to be updated every
instruction to stay current^[38](Source4.html)^. Since the AP-101
allows 61 different interrupt conditions divided into 20 priority
levels, it is necessary to have an accurate indication of where a
program left off when interrupted^[39](Source4.html)^. At any given
time, several programs are likely to be in a suspended state.

The processor has more than one level of addressing. The common 16-bit
address can only directly address 64K words, which was the original
memory size of the AP-101. The addressing is extended by replacing the
highest order bit with 4 bits from the program status word that indicate
which sector of memory to access^[40](Source4.html)^. This is
similar to the scheme used in the AGC when its memory had to be
expanded. This configuration allows 131,072 full words (32-bit words) to
be addressed. The architecture permits addressing up to 262,144 full
words, so memory can be expanded without affecting the processor's
design^[41](Source4.html)^.

\pagebreakon{96} Due to packaging considerations, the core memory is located
partly in the central processor and partly in the IOP (they are boxed
separately). However, it is still considered as a single unit for
addressing and access. The entire memory is shared, not just the portion
located in the individual boxes. Originally, 40K of core were in the CPU
and 24K in the IOP. The memory is organized into modules with 18-bit
half words. These contain 16 bits of data, a parity bit, and a storage
protect bit to prevent unintentional alteration of the
data^[42](Source4.html)^. The original memory modules contained 8K
half words, so 6 were needed in the IOP and 10 in the CPU to store 64K
full words. Later memory expansion consisted of replacing the CPU memory
modules with double-density modules, in which twice the cores are in the
same size container as a single-density module^[43](Source4.html)^.
So by the first flight, the Shuttle computer memories were 104K words or
106,496 full words of 32 bits. The memory access time is 400
nanoseconds, quite fast for core.

</div>

The eventual Shuttle instruction set contained 154 instructions defined
within that 2K memory. However, the expected advantages of the
flexibility of microcoding, which influenced the decision to select the
AP-101, were lessened by the fact that at least six of the new
instructions either did not work properly or performed
insufficiently^[44](Source4.html)^. One NASA manager said that the
microcoding was bungled by "the ones and zeroes artists" (referring to
the binary numbered nature of microprograms) who apparently tried to do
things the tricky way^[45](Source4.html)^. NASA tried to correct its
tendency to underestimate memory size, but was disappointed again on the
Shuttle program. One requirement for memory was that it be large enough
to contain all the programs necessary for a mission. Therefore, memory
estimates became a regular part of preliminary design studies. Most
estimates in the 1969 to 1971 period ranged around 28K
words^[46](Source4.html)^. Rockwell International settled on 32K in
its bid and won the contract partially because of that
estimate^[47](Source4.html)^. NASA, trying to save itself from later
difficulties, bought 64K of memory for each computer, hoping that
doubling the estimate would be enough (despite memory increases in
previous programs of several hundred percent)^[48](Source4.html)^.
Unfortunately, the software grew to over 700K, requiring not only more
computer memory, but the addition of mass memory units to hold programs
that would not fit into the extended core. Parten said after this, "I
don't know how you ensure proper memory size ahead of time, unless
you're incredibly lucky"^[49](Source4.html)^. From the standpoint of
a spacecraft designer worried about power requirements, an interesting
feature of the AP-101 memory is that only the module currently being
accessed is at full power. If a memory module is used, it remains at
full power for 20 microseconds. \pagebreakon{97} If no further accesses are
made in that interval, it automatically goes to medium power. If the
entire computer is in standby mode, it goes to low power. An estimated
136 watts are saved by doing this switching^[50](Source4.html)^.

The memory can be altered in flight. The ground can uplink bursts of 64
16-bit halfwords at a time, which can replace data already in the
specified addresses. The crew can also change up to six 32-bit words
simultaneously by using their displays and keyboards. However, those
changes must be hand keyed in hexadecimal.

The Shuttle's AP-101 contains one of the most extensive sets of
self-testing hardware and software ever used in a flight computer. Its
self-test hardware resides in the BITE, or built-in test equipment. When
this is coupled with the self-test software, 95% of hardware failures
can be detected by the machine itself^[51](Source4.html)^, whereas
the other 5% and potential software failures require the use of
redundancy.

As evidenced by the component description given here, the IBM AP-101 is
a fairly common computer architecture, easily understandable and
programmable by anyone familiar with IBM's large commercial mainframes.
The IOPS, bus system, and displays contain the characteristics that make
the Shuttle DPS unique.

#### The IOPs and the Bus System

It is difficult to discuss the Shuttle's IOPs without also talking about
the data bus network, because the former are designed to manage the
latter. All subsystems on the spacecraft are connected redundantly to at
least a pair of data buses. There are 24 of these buses, and the
subsystems share them, using multiplexers to control the sharing. Eight
of the 24 are "flight-critical data buses" that help fly the vehicle; 5
are used for intercomputer communication among the five general-purpose
computers; 4 connect to the four display units; 2 run to the twin mass
memory units; 2 more are "launch data buses," and connect to the Launch
Processing System; 2 are used for payloads, and the final pair for
instrumentation^[52](Source4.html)^. Each bus is individually
controlled by a microprogrammed processor, essentially a small
special-purpose computer, called a bus control element (BCE). The BCE
can access memory and execute independent
programs^[53](Source4.html)^. A twenty-fifth computer, the Master
Sequence Controller, is used to control I/O flow on the 24
BCEs^[54](Source4.html)^. Thus, each IOP contains 25 dedicated
computers. In addition, the IOP itself is basically a programmable
processor with multiple functions. It shares main memory with the
central processor. If a program affecting the IOP is initiated by the
central processor, a direct memory access channel is opened to speed up
reading core. That, however, creates contention for the memory
\pagebreakon{98} with the central processor and may have the effect of
actually slowing down the system as a whole^[55](Source4.html)^.

One reason an IOP is needed is that the Shuttle computers transfer data
internally in parallel along 18-bit buses. This means that one half word
and its associated parity bit are moved from memory to the operation
registers and back again all at once. However, data are transferred from
orbiter subsystems to the IOP in serial form, one bit at a time. Of
course, the serial data are at a high rate (1 megahertz), so transfer
speed is not a concern. The conversion of serial data to parallel data
is the function of the Multiplexer Interface Adapters in the
IOP^[56](Source4.html)^. The Shuttle DPS also has 16
multiplexer/demultiplexers that convert parallel data to serial for
output to the buses^[57](Source4.html)^.

Input and output to each computer is ultimately controlled in two modes:
command and listen. In command mode (CM), signals sent from the host
processor to subsystems connected to a bus controlled by a commanding
BCE will actually effect the commands. In listen mode, the subsystems
will ignore the command signals. In both cases input to the computer
from any bus is listened to, but the computer's orders are obeyed only
by the systems on the buses for which it is the commander. This moding
capability means that a single computer can be assigned a set of buses
different from another computer, thus spreading out the responsibilities
and protecting against failure. It also means that each computer
receives all input data all the time, so that it can take over from a
failed computer immediately. This is especially important to the backup
flight system. The set of controlled buses is called a "string." A
typical string for a single computer might be a pair of flight critical
buses, one intercomputer bus (always), a display bus, and a bus from the
mass memory unit (MMU), payload, launch, and instrumentation group. The
strings can be reconfigured by the crew in flight, which is done
periodically as missions proceed through various phases.

#### Display Electronics

The Shuttle's display system, built by the Norden Division of United
Technologies Corporation, is the most complex ever used on a flying
machine and contains computers of its own. For the first time in a
spacecraft, cathode ray tubes (CRTs) are used as the primary display
medium, although a wealth of warning lights that supplement the displays
still dot the cockpit. The CRTs hold 26 lines of 51 characters on a 5-
by 7-inch screen. That screen size is fairly common on portable
computers. However, the number of characters per line is smaller (51 vs.
the more common 80) and the number of lines larger (26 vs. the usual
24). The net effect is that the individual characters appear slightly
larger on the Shuttle's screens, necessary because although \pagebreakon{99}
the user of a portable computer is usually about 16 inches from the
screen, on the Shuttle the distance between user and screen is well over
2 feet. Information on the Shuttle's screens appears green on black, and
characters can be selectively highlighted. Three of these screens are
mounted in the forward cockpit between the pilots. A fourth is aft at
the mission specialist station. Keyboards, built by Ebonex, are used for
crew input. Two are between the pilots, with a third adjacent to the
mission specialist's CRT.

Displays placed on the CRTs are controlled by a special-purpose computer
with a 16-bit word size and 8K of memory. This computer provides display
control and can create circles, lines, intensity changes (highlighting),
and flashing messages. The display software is stored on the MMUs until
the computer is powered up. The CRT and its associated processor is
referred to as the display electronics unit
(DEU)^[58](Source4.html)^.

#### Mass Memory Unit: A Late Addition

The final component of the Shuttle's DPS hardware is the mass memory
unit (MMU). Originally acquired only to provide initial loading of the
orbiter's computers, the MMU, built by Odetics, Inc., has been used
extensively to help resolve the memory growth problem. Two of these
units are installed on the orbiter, each capable of containing 8 million
16-bit words, enough for three times the Shuttle software. The tape can
be addressed in 512 word blocks, and the crew can alter its contents in
flight using a special display^[59](Source4.html)^. The MMU stores
all the Primary Avionics Software System and all the software for the
Backup Flight System, the DEUs, and the engine controllers. Thus, the
Shuttle continues the same computer/mass memory configuration as the
Gemini spacecraft.

This complex network of computer hardware on the orbiter has many
possible points of failure. Also, the 700K of flight software may
contain undiscovered bugs that could emerge at critical mission times,
and self-testing might not be sufficient to protect the spacecraft from
such failures. Other schemes for preventing a fatal failure need to be
developed if the Shuttle is to fly with the confidence of its crew,
passengers, and potential paying customers. Exactly what those schemes
would be has occupied many researchers for several years.
