\newpageon{86}

### Computers in the Space Shuttle Avionics System

Computers are used more extensively on the Space
Transportation System (STS) than on any previous aircraft or spacecraft.
In conventional aircraft, mechanical linkages and cables connect pilot
controls, such as the rudder pedals and stick, to hydraulic actuators at
the control surfaces. However, the Shuttle contains a fully digital
fly-by-wire avionics system. All connections are electrical and are
routed through computers. To give the spacecraft more autonomy, system
management functions (fuel levels, life support, etc.), handled on the
ground during previous flight programs, are monitored on board. Software
can be adjusted to suit increasingly complex and varied payloads.
Subsystems, like the main engines, that had no computer assistance
before use them for performance improvement. And, as in Gemini and
Apollo, guidance and navigation tasks are accomplished on the Shuttle
with computers. All these functions, especially flight control, are
critical to mission success; therefore, the computers performing the
tasks must be made fail-safe by using redundancy. Meeting these
requirements has resulted in one of the most complex software systems
ever produced and a computer network within the spacecraft with more
powerful hardware than many ground-based computer centers in the
mid-1960s.

The major differences between the Shuttle computer system and the
systems used on Gemini and Apollo were the choice of an "off-the-shelf"
main computer instead of a custom-made machine and the pervasiveness of
the system within the spacecraft, since the main computers are the heart
of any true avionics system. Avionics (aviation plus electronics) grew
in the 1950s and 1960s as electronic devices, especially digital
devices, replaced mechanical or analog equipment in aircraft. These
digital devices were combined into a coherent system, rather than
isolated in function and location within the aircraft. Several modem
military airplanes have applied this concept to varying degrees. The
FB-111, an Air Force tactical bomber, has a complex avionics system that
Rockwell International built just before it was awarded the Shuttle
contract**^[1](Source4.html)^**; the F-15 fighter used an AP-1 computer
in its system. A repackaged version of the F-15's computer became the
AP-101 used in the shuttle**^[2](Source4.html)^**. However, in no
aircraft has the Shuttle's avionics system been matched as yet. For
instance, its main computers have to interconnect with other computers
in subsystems, such as the controllers on each main engine, whereas most
aircraft systems are centered on a single set of machines.

Since the Shuttle is completely dependent on the success of its avionics
system, each component must be made failure proof. The method chosen to
ensure this is absolute redundancy, often to a depth of four duplicate
devices. Managing this level of redundancy became a large problem in
itself.

Another result of the pervasive avionics system is that the frequency
and sophistication of the crew interaction with the computers exceeds
any previous manned space program. A large portion of the

\newpageon{87}

![**Figure 4--1**. The first launch of the Shuttle Challenger, one of a fleet
of the most computationally intensive spacecraft ever built. (NASA
photo)](images/p87.jpg)

\newpageon{88} software is directed at easing the necessary commanding
of the computers. In general, software development for the Shuttle has
far outstripped any previous NASA ground or flight system in effort and
cost. The combination of requirements forced the Agency to pioneer
techniques in digital avionics, redundancy management, computer
interconnection, and real-time software development.
