### Using the Shuttle DPS

With the level of complexity present in the hardware and
software just described, it is not surprising that the crew interfaces
to those components are also complex. The complexity is caused not so
much by the design of the interfaces but by the limited amount of memory
available for graphics displays, automatic reconfiguring of the
computers, and other utilities to make the system more cooperative and
simpler for the users. There is some difference between the way the
users of the system perceive the DPS and the way the designers, both
NASA and IBM, perceive it. Some astronauts and trainers are openly
critical. John Young, the Chief Astronaut in the early 1980s,
complained, "What we have in the Shuttle is a disaster. We are not
making computers do what we want"**^[158](Source4.html)^**, Flight
trainer Frank Hughes also remarked that "the PASS doesn't do anything
for us"**^[159](Source4.html)^**, noting that such practical items as
the time from loss of ground-station signals and acquisition of new
stations is not part of the primary software. Both said, "We end up
working for the computer, rather than the computer working for us." This
comment is something reminiscent of Apollo days, when the number of
keystrokes needed to fly a mission was a concern. John Aaron, one of
NASA's designers of PASS interfaces and later chief of spacecraft
software, said that the Apollo experience influenced Shuttle designers
to avoid excessive pilot interaction with the computers. Even so, he
found the "crew

\newpageon{123}

![**Figure 4--7**. The forward flight deck of a Shuttle, with the three CRT
screens and twin keyboards visible in the center. (NASA photo
S80-35133)](images/p123.jpg)

interfaces...more confusing and complex than I thought they would
be"**^[160](Source4.html)^**. One statistic that supports his perception
is that the 13,000 keystrokes used in a week-long lunar mission are
matched by a Shuttle crew in a 58-hour flight**^[161](Source4.html)^**.

Another aspect of the "working for the computer" problem is that steps
normally done by computers using preprogrammed functions are done
manually on the Shuttle. The reconfiguration of PASS from the ascent
redundant set to the on-orbit groupings has to be done by the crew, a
process taking several minutes and needing to be reversed before
descent. Aaron acknowledges that the computer interfaces are too close
to machine level, but points out that management "would not buy" simple
automatic reconfiguration schemes. Even if they had, there is no
computer memory to store such utilities.

Tied to the computer memory problem is the fact that many functions
\newpageon{124} have to be displayed together on a screen because of the
fact that such displays are "memory hungry." As a result, many screens
are so crowded that reading them quickly is difficult, the process being
further affected by the blandness and primitive nature of any graphics
available. Astronaut Vance Brand claimed that after initial confusion,
several hours with simulators makes things easier to find; he makes a
point of checking his entries on the input line before pressing the
execute key**^[162](Source4.html)^**. Young does that as well, but for
additional reasons: The keyboard buffer is so small that entering data
too quickly causes some to be lost, and he wants to check whether he is
accessing the right screen display with the proper keyboard. This latter
concern arises because there are only two keyboards for the three
forward CRTs. Since both keyboards can be assigned to the same screen,
two CRTs may not be currently set up for input. Even if the two
keyboards are assigned to different screens, one CRT is left without
capability for immediate crew input. Astronaut Henry Hartsfield termed
this situation "prone to error"**^[163](Source4.html)^**.

Since flying the Shuttle is in many ways flying the Shuttle computers
(they provide the active flight control, guidance and navigation,
systems management, and payload functions), the astronauts are
interested in making suggestions for improving the computer system. Most
revolve around more automation, more user friendliness, more color,
better graphics, and more functions, such as adding a
return-to-launch-site (RTLS) abort with two engines out in addition to
the present version with only one engine out**^[164](Source4.html)^**.
Each of these enhancements is tied to increasing memory. IBM proposed a
new version of the Shuttle computers with 256K of memory and software
compatibility with the existing system. Johnson Space Center began
testing these AP-101F computers in 1985, with the first operational use
projected for the resumption of Shuttle missions in 1988.

In the meantime, the astronauts themselves pioneered efforts to use
small computers to add functions and back up the primary systems. Early
flights used a Hewlett-Packard HP-41C programmable calculator to
determine ground-station availability, as well as carry a limited
version of the calculations for time-to-retrofire. Beginning with STS-9
in December, 1983, a Grid Systems Compass portable microcomputer with
graphics capabilities was carried to display ground stations and to
provide functions impractical on the primary computers. Mission
Specialist Terry Hart, responsible for programming the HP-41Cs, said
that placing the mission documentation on the computer was also being
considered**^[165](Source4.html)^**.
