\newpageon{133}

### Conclusion

The DPS on the Shuttle orbiter reflects the state of
software engineering in the 1970s. Even though the software was
admittedly the key component of the spacecraft, NASA chose the hardware
before the first software requirement was written. This is typical of
practice in 1972, but less so now. NASA managers knew that time and
money spent on detailed software requirements specification and the
corresponding development of a test and verification program would save
millions of dollars and much effort later. The establishment of a
dedicated facility for development was an innovative idea and helped
keep costs down by centralization and standardization. A combination of
complete requirements, an aggressive test plan, a decent development
facility, and the experience of NASA, Rockwell, Draper, and IBM
engineers in real-time systems was enough to create a successful Shuttle
DPS.

Even as the system took shape, NASA managers looked to the future of
manned spacecraft software. Increased automation of code and test case
generation, automated change insertion and verification, and perhaps
automated requirements development are all considered future necessities
if development costs are to be kept down and reliability increased. In
the 1980s, a new opportunity for software development and hardware
selection presents itself with NASA's long-awaited Space Station. NASA
has another chance to adopt updated software engineering techniques and,
perhaps, to develop others. Success in space is increasingly tied to
success in the software factory.
