### The space shuttle main engine controllers

Among the many special-purpose computers on the Shuttle,
the\pagebreakon{125}
<div class="inbox">Box 4-6: Using the Shuttle's Keyboards

The Shuttle's keyboards are different from those found on Gemini and
Apollo because they are hexadecimal, or base 16, rather than decimal, so
that memory locations can be altered by hex entries from the keyboard. A
single hex digit represents 4 bits, so just four digits can fill a
half-word memory location. The other keys perform specialized functions.
The most often used are

* ITEM: This selects a specific function displayed on a CRT. For example,
if the astronaut wishes to perform a faction numbered 32 on the screen,
he or she presses ITEM, 3, 2, EXEC.

* OPS: This, plus a four-digit number, selects the operational sequence
and major mode desired by the crew. For instance, to choose the first
major mode of the ascent software, OPS, 1, 1, 0, 1, and PRO is entered.

* SPEC: This key, plus appropriate digits and PRO, selects a specialist
faction or display function screen. Each OPS has associated with it a
number of primary screens that reflect what is happening in the
software. The ascent program has a vertical path graphic, for instance.
Additionally, special functions can be called from SPEC displays that
are overlaid on the primary screens when called. On-orbit, and several
other OPS, have a "GPC Memory" display that can be used to read or write
to individual memory locations. It cannot be called from either the
ascent or descent OPS. Display function screens are just that: used to
show various data such as fuel cell levels, but with no crew functions.
To return to the primary screen that was on the CRT before the SPEC or
DISP call, the RESUME key is used.

* CLEAR: Each time this key is depressed, one character is deleted from
the input line on the CRT accessed. This enables an astronaut to erase
an error if it is caught before EXEC or PRO is depressed.

* "+" : This sign can be used as a delimiter around numeric data or
between a series of function selections.

</div>
main engine controllers stand out as a clear "first" in space
technology. The Shuttle's three main liquid-propellant engines are the
most complex and "hottest" rockets ever built. The complexity is tied to
the mission requirements, which state that they be throttleable, a
common characteristic of internal combustion engines and turbojets, but
rare in the rocket business. They run "hotter" than any other rocket
engine because at any given moment they are closer to destroying
themselves than their predecessors. Previous engines were overbuilt in
the sense that they were designed to burn at full thrust through their
entire\pagebreakon{126}
![**Figure 4--8**. Keyboard layout of the Shuttle computer system. (From
NASA, *Data Processing System Workbook*)](images/p126.jpg)
lifetime of a few minutes with no chance that the continuous
explosion of fuel and oxidizer would get out of control. To ensure this,
engineers designed combustion chambers and cooling systems better than
optimum, with the result that the engines weighed more than
less-protected designs, thus reducing performance. Engineers also set
fluid mixtures and flow rates by mechanical means at preset levels, and
levels could not be changed to gain greater performance. The Shuttle
engines can adjust flow levels, can sense how close to exploding they
are, and can respond in such a way as to maintain maximum performance at
all times. Neither the throttleability or the performance enhancements
could be accomplished without a digital computer as a control device.

In 1972, NASA chose Rocketdyne as the engine contractor, with\pagebreakon{127}
![**Figure 4--9**. A typical display of the Primary Avionics Software System.
(From NASA, *Data Processing System Workbook*)](images/p127.jpg)
Marshall Space Flight Center responsible for monitoring the design,
production, and testing of the engines. Rocketdyne conducted a
preliminary study of the engine control problem and recommended that a
distributed approach be used for the solution**^[166](Source4.html)^**.
By placing controllers at the engines themselves, complex interfaces
between the engine and vehicle could be avoided. Also, the high data
rates needed for active control are best handled with a dedicated
computer. Both Marshall and Rocketdyne agreed that a digital computer
controller was better than an analog controller for three reasons.
First, software allows for greater flexibility. Inasmuch as the control
concepts for the engines were far from settled in 1972, NASA considered
the ease of modifying software versus hardware a very important
advantage**^[167](Source4.html)^**. \pagebreakon{128} Second, the digital
system could respond faster. And third, the failure detection function
could be simpler**^[168](Source4.html)^**. Basically, the computer has
only two functions: to control the engine and to do self tests.

The concept of fail operational/fail-safe is preserved with the engine
controllers because each engine has a dual redundant computer attached
to it. Failure of the first computer does not impede operational
capability, as the second takes over instantly. Failure of the second
computer causes a graceful shutdown of the affected
engine**^[169](Source4.html)^**. Loss of an engine does not cause any
immediate danger to a Shuttle crew, as demonstrated in a 1985 mission
that lost an engine and still achieved orbit. If engine loss occurs
early in a flight, the mission can be aborted through a RTLS maneuver
that causes the spacecraft essentially to turn around and fly back to a
runway near the launch pad. Slightly later aborts may lead to a landing
in Europe for Kennedy Space Center launches. If the engine fails near
orbit it may be possible to achieve an orbit and then modify it using
the orbital maneuvering system engines.

#### Controller Software and Redundancy Management

As with the main computers on the Shuttle, software is an important part
of the engine controller system. NASA managers adopted a strict software
engineering approach to the controller code. Marshall's Walter Mitchell
said, "We try to treat the software exactly like the
hardware"**^[170](Source4.html)^**. In fact, the controller software is
more closely married to engine hardware than in other systems under
computer control. The controllers operate as a real-time system with a
fixed cyclic execution schedule. Each major cycle has four 5-millisecond
minor cycles for a total of 20 milliseconds. This is a high frequency,
necessitated by the requirement to control a rapidly changing engine
environment. Each major cycle starts and ends with a self test. It
proceeds through engine control tasks, input sensor data reads, engine
limit monitoring tasks, output, another round of input sensor data, a
check of internal voltage, and then the second self
test**^[171](Source4.html)^**. Some free time is built into the cycle to
avoid overruns into the next cycle. So that the controller will not
waste processing time handling data requests from the primary avionics
system, direct memory access of engine component data can be made by the
primary**^[172](Source4.html)^**.

As with the primary computers in the Shuttle, the memory of the
controller cannot hold all the software originally designed for it. A
set of preflight checkout programs have to be stored on the MMU and
rolled in during the countdown. At T-30 hours, the engines are activated
and the flight software load is read from the mass
memory**^[173](Source4.html)^**. Even this way, fewer than 500 words of
the 16K are unused**^[174](Source4.html)^**.

\pagebreakon{129}

![**Figure 4--10**. A Shuttle Main Engine Controller mounted in an
engineering simulator at the Marshal Space Flight Center. (NASA
photo)](images/p129.jpg)

Although redundant, the controllers are not synchronized like the
primary computers. Marshall Space Flight Center studied active
synchronization, but the additional hardware and software overhead
seemed too expensive**^[175](Source4.html)^**. The present system of
redundancy management most closely resembles that used by the Skylab
computers. Since Marshall also had responsibility for those computers
and was making the decision about the controllers at the same time
Skylab was operating, some influence from the ATMDC experience is
possible. Two watchdog timers are used to flag failures. One is
incremented by the real-time clock and the other, by a clock in the
output electronics. Each has to be reset by the software. If the timers
run out, the software or critical hardware of the computer responsible
for resetting them is assumed failed and the Channel B computer takes
over at that point. The timeout is set at 18 milliseconds, so the engine
involved is "uncontrolled" by a failed computer for less than a major
cycle before the redundant computer takes over**^[176](Source4.html)^**.

\pagebreakon{130}

<div class="inbox">Box 4-7: Shuttle Engine Controller Hardware

The computer chosen for the engine controllers is the Honeywell HDC-601.
The Air Force was using it in 1972 when the choice was made, so
operational experience existed. Additionally, the machine was software
compatible with the DDP 516, a ground-based Honeywell minicomputer, so a
development environment was available. Honeywell built parts of the
controller in St. Petersburg, Florida and shipped those to the main
plant in Minneapolis for final assembly; within a couple of years, all
the construction tasks moved to St. Petersburg. By mid-1983, Honeywell
completed 29 of the computers**^[177](Source4.html)^**.

The HDC-601 uses a 16-bit instruction word. It can do an add in 2
microseconds, a multiply in 9. Eighty-seven instructions are available
to programmers, and all software is coded in assembly
language**^[178](Source4.html)^**. The memory is 2-mil plated wire,
which has been used widely in the military and is known for its
ruggedness. It functions much like a core memory in that data are stored
as a one or zero by changing the polarity in a segment of the wire. Each
machine has 16K of 17 bits, the seventeenth bit used to provide even
parity**^[179](Source4.html)^**. Plated wire has the advantage of having
nondestructive readout capability.

The controllers are arranged with power, central processor, and
interfaces as independent components, but the I/O devices are cross
strapped. This provides a reliability increase of 15 to 20 times, as
modular failures can be isolated. The computers and associated
electronics are referred to as Channel A and Channel B. With the cross
strapping, if Channel A's output electronics failed, than Channel B's
could he used by Channel A's computer**^[180](Source4.html)^**.

Packaging is a serious consideration with engine controllers, since they
are physically attached to a running rocket engine, hardly the benign
environment found in most computer rooms. The use of late 1960s
technology, which creates computers with larger numbers of discrete
components and fewer ICs, means that the engine builders are penalized
in designing appropriate packages**^[181](Source4.html)^**. Rocketdyne
bolted early versions of the controller directly to the engine,
resulting in forces of 22g rattling the computer and causing failures.
The simple addition of a rubber gasket reduced the g forces to about 3
or 4. Within the outer box, the circuit cards are held in place by foam
wedges to further reduce vibration effects**^[182](Source4.html)^**.

</div>
