### The future of the Shuttle's computers

The computers in the Shuttle were candidates for change due
to the rapid progress of technology coupled with the long life of each
Shuttle vehicle. First to be replaced were the engine controllers.
By

\newpageon{131}

![**Figure 4--11**. A Shuttle main engine in a ground test. The Controller
can be seen mounted on the left side of the combustion chamber. (NASA
photo 885338)](images/p131.jpg)

\newpageon{132} the early 1980s, Marshall Space Flight Center began
studying a Block II controller design because it was becoming impossible
to find parts and programmers for the late 1960s components of the Block
I**^[183](Source4.html)^**. The revised computer uses a Motorola 68000
32-bit microprocessor. When selected, it was clearly the state of the
art. Instead of plated wire, a CMOS-type semiconductor random-access
memory is used. Finally, the software is written in the high-level
programming language, C. Such a computer reflects the current design and
components of a ground-based, powerful digital control system. The C
language is also known as an excellent tool for software systems
development. In fact, the UNIX operating system is coded in it.

Aside from the processor change, the Block II's memory was increased to
64K words. Therefore, the entire controller software, including
preflight routines, can be loaded at one time. Semiconductor memories
have the advantages of high speed, lower power consumption, and higher
density than core, but lack core memory's ability to retain data when
power is shut off. Reliability of the memory in the Block II computer
was assured by replicating the 64K and providing a three-tier power
supply**^[184](Source4.html)^**. Both Channel A and Channel B have two
sets of 64K memories, each loaded with identical software. Failure in
one causes a switch-over to the other. This protects against hardware
failures in the memory chips. The three tiers of power protect against
losing memory. The first level of power is the standard 115-volt primary
supply. If it fails, a pair of 28-volt backup supplies, one for each
channel, is available from other components of the system. Last, a
battery backup, standard on most earth-based computer systems, can
preserve memory but not run the processor.

The significance of the evolution to Block II engine controllers is that
they represent the first use of semiconductor memories and
microprocessors in a life-critical component of a manned spacecraft.
Honeywell scheduled delivery of a breadboard version suitable for
testing in mid-1985. The new controller is physically the same length
and width, so it fits the old mounting. The depth is expected to be
somewhat less. When the first of these computers flies on a Shuttle,
NASA will have skipped from 1968 computer technology to 1982 technology
in one leap.

IBM's new version of the AP-101 (the F) incorporates some of the same
advantages gained by the new technology of the engine controllers.
Increasing the memory to 256K words means that the ascent, on-orbit, and
descent software can be fitted into the memory all at once. (This is not
likely to happen, however, because of the pressing need to improve the
crew interfaces and expand existing functions.) Higher component density
allows the CPU and IOP to be fitted into one box roughly the size and
weight of either of their predecessors. Execution speed is now
accelerated to nearly 1 million operations per second, twice the
original value. In essence, NASA has finally acquired the power and
capability it wanted in 1972, before the software requirements showed
the inadequacy of the original AP-101.

\newpageon{133} As in the engine controllers, the memory in the AP-101F is
made of semiconductors. Power can be applied to the memory even when the
central processor is shut down so as to keep the stored programs from
disappearing. A commercially available error detection and correcting
chip is included to constantly scan the memory and correct single bit
errors. These precautions help eliminate the disadvantage of volatility
while still preserving the size, power, and weight advantages of using
semiconductors over core memories**^[185](Source4.html)^**.
