### The Star Computer

\newpageon{149}

#### Researching the Reliability Problem

In 1961 a Lithuanian-born computer scientist named Algirdas
Avizienis, employed at UCLA, began research on a highly fault-tolerant
computer system for use on long-duration space missions. The
nonprogrammable version of the Central Computer and Sequencer would soon
make its first flight on Mariner Venus 1962. Even at that early date,
JPL expected to use computers on board the "Grand Tour" spacecraft
planned for the 1970s. A favorable alignment of the outer planets would
make possible a mission that could fly by Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune, thus having encounters with all the gas giants in one sweep.
Such a mission would have to last for years, with the spacecraft
operating autonomously for long periods of time. Inconvenient
speed-of-light communications delays in the exploration of the inner
planets would become crippling in an outer planets mission, requiring a
spacecraft to carry its own "brain," because the earthbound brains of
its makers would be hours away in an emergency.

Avizienis' chief interest was in computer reliability. Computer failures
occurred much more frequently then than in today's world of ICs. A
computer entrusted with the successful completion of a deep space
mission could not afford to fail before or during its long awaited
encounter, so JPL and Avizienis' interests came together at just the
right time. During the period from 1961 to 1965, the Laboratory
sponsored his search for a more fault-tolerant computer. In 1965 the
reliability scheme was settled and construction of a prototype began.
The breadboard version first ran a program in March of 1969, after a
2-year effort at software development**^[38](Source5.html)^**. Avizienis
named the computer STAR, for self testing and repair, and the name gives
a clue to the architecture. JPL's Flight Computers and Sequencers
Section of the Guidance and Navigation Division paid for the work.
Avizienis was responsible for the concept; David A. Rennels, later a
colleague at UCLA, for the hardware; John A. Rohr, for the software.
F.P. Mathur did the reliability calculations, and the MIT
Instrumentation Laboratory developed the read-only memory, which was
basically a core rope type of memory**^[39](Source5.html)^**.

\newpageon{150} Avizienis used selective redundancy to achieve reliability.
On the Space Shuttle, the on-board computers are complete redundant
versions of each other and are considered multiple computers. In the
STAR, the computer is considered a single entity with its separate
components replicated. Thus, each subsystem of STAR had several
duplicate versions of itself in the computer as spares. The key
advantage is that the spares were unpowered as long as the primary
component ran successfully. Only when there was a failure would the
spare come to life, and then power to the failed component would be cut
off. Thus, the total power consumption of the STAR equaled, but did not
exceed, that of a similar computer without the spares, making it
attractive to power-conscious spacecraft
designers**^[40](Source5.html)^**. In the 1960s, all spacecraft
computers were simplex systems. The only ultrareliable system was the
Launch Vehicle Digital Computer used on the Saturn IB and Saturn V
boosters. Its reliability was achieved by using triple modular redundant
(TMR) circuits such as those in the Common Section of the Skylab
computer system. Avizienis evaluated TMR circuitry and found that the
number of independent failures a TMR system could tolerate before
failing was much smaller than a component-redundant computer such as
STAR could tolerate**^[41](Source5.html)^**. Also, reliability
theoretically increased through dormancy**^[42](Source5.html)^**.
Mean-time-between-failure (MTBF) figures for a component begin when the
component is turned on; thus, a subsystem with a MTBF of 1,000 hours,
backed up with two identical spares, yields a MTBF of 3,000 hours. That
was the theory behind STAR.

Avizienis reasoned that failures were either caused by transient
conditions or permanent component failures. In order to check for
transient faults, STAR would repeat the program segment in which a fault
was first detected. If the fault repeated itself, the affected component
would be turned off and its spare activated, with the program segment
repeated again. All fault detection was by hardware techniques, with
error-correcting codes included in the software[43](Source5.html).
Potentially, STAR could be an "automatic repairman" for the entire
spacecraft, if other spacecraft systems used the same
concepts[44](Source5.html).

#### Applications for STAR

In 1969, JPL began designing a Thermoelectric Outer Planet Spacecraft,
or TOPS. In previous inner planet probes, the flight paths were close
enough to the sun to enable the spacecraft to use solar cells for power
generation. Outer planet missions ranged so far from the sun that solar
cells would be inadequate. TOPS would carry radioisotope thermoelectric
generators to provide electrical power.

\newpageon{151}

![**Figure 5--3**. The STAR computer configuration. (From Avizienis,
](images/p151.jpg)

\newpageon{152}

<div class="inbox">Box 5-2: STAR Architecture and Software

STAR was a fixed-point machine with a 32-bit word. Using separated
components for redundancy meant that they had to be connected on a bus,
which had 4-bit bytes as the basic transfer
block**^[45](Source5.html)^**. There were 16K words of read-only memory,
which Avizienis said consisted of a "braid" of transformers and
wires**^[46](Source5.html)^**. Since MIT built the device, the
description almost certainly indicates that it was a core rope similar
to that used in the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC). The basic version
used two copies of 4K of random-access memory, with up to 12 units
attachable. Avizienis forsaw that the memory would have to be
reprogrammed in flight on a mission like Grand Tour, so provision was
made for that function**^[47](Source5.html)^**.

Use of a large word size was not to increase arithmetic power as much as
to provide space for error-checking codes. A STAR address consisted of a
16-bit field for the address and a 4-bit check field. The address would
be multiplied by 15 (yielding 20 bits), and then stored or transmitted
along the bus during an operation. At the receiving end, the address
would be evaluated according to the following equation:

C(a) = 15-15Ia
where 15Ia is the modulo residue of a. Numeric data were handled
similarly; the 28-bit operands multiplied by 15 to get a 32-bit word. If
the result of the check operation was zero residue, the data or address
was correct. If not, STAR issued a fault signal**^[48](Source5.html)^**.

STAR had three control signals. One was the common 1-megahertz CLOCK
signal. RESET indicated a return to a standard initial state. SYNC
signaled the beginning of a new 10-step instruction
cycle**^[49](Source5.html)^**. If a fault was detected, the computer
would return to the last SYNC point and begin executing instructions
from there. If the 10 instructions after the SYNC were executed
successfully, STAR sent a new SYNC signal.

STAR's read/write memory units were different in that they would
recognize either their hard-wired name or an assigned
name**^[50](Source5.html)^**. In this way, if a memory unit and its
backup copy failed, another memory unit could be assigned its name,
loaded with the appropriate data, and then act like the original memory
unit, thus avoiding the necessity of changing all the addresses in the
software. When an instruction appeared on the memory in (MI) bus, the
memory unit that had that address put its contents on the memory out
(MO) bus, and the Arithmetic Processor or other component loaded it in
for processing**^[51](Source5.html)^**.

\newpageon{153} The heart of the STAR was the Testing and Repair Processor,
or TARP. Whereas the other components of STAR had either one or two
unpowered spares, the TARP had three active versions and two inactive
spares. Functions of the TARP were to maintain the rollback points to
which the software returned after a failure detection, to diagnose
failures, and to check itself. Each time an error check was made, TARP's
three units would vote. If all three or two of three indicated a
failure, then the TARP issued an unconditional transfer to the rollback
point. In the case of a 2-to-1 vote, the dissenting unit was considered
failed, and was shut off as a spare was
activated**^[52](Source5.html)^**. Another TARP disagreement caused the
last spare to be activated. On the third TARP failure, one of the
previously shut down units would be reactivated, so that there were
always three TARPs in action at any given time. Avizienis thought that
since most failures would be transients, it would be safe to reactivate
a unit. After all, if it disagreed again, it would be shutdown.

John A. Rohr's software group did not begin work until 1967. An
assembler, loader, and simulator were developed on a UNIVAC 1108
mainframe computer owned by JPL**^[53](Source5.html)^**. Software was
all done in assembler, with a rich set of 180 single address
instructions**^[54](Source5.html)^**. The assembler did allow some types
of higher level statements, mostly for arithmetic. For instance, COMP
Y=Y + 1 was directly compiled into the several machine instructions
necessary for execution**^[55](Source5.html)^**. In this way, some of
the tedium associated with assembly language programming was avoided. A
floating-point subroutine to extend the calculating power of the machine
was planned, but there is no evidence it was ever
Implemented**^[56](Source5.html)^**. It would have had to have been done
in software. The STARlet, a limited breadboard version, ran its first
program on March 24, 1969**^[57](Source5.html)^**. The full system, save
the timing processor, was on the bread-board by April
1978**^[58](Source5.html)^**.

</div>

STAR was considered as the on-board computer for
TOPS**^[59](Source5.html)^**. A control computer subsystem for the TOPS
would use STAR technology, the full 32-bit word, but just 4K of
read-only memory and 8K of the read/write
memory**^[60](Source5.html)^**. The chief physical obstacle to using
STAR on a spacecraft was size. The breadboard version filled 100 cubic
feet. Avizienis wanted to reduce it to 2 cubic feet and 50
watts**^[61](Source5.html)^**. By 1971, the requirements reduced to 1
cubic foot, 40 pounds weight, and 40 watts
power**^[62](Source5.html)^**. Even though progress was made in this
area, STAR never flew on a spacecraft. Components built to STAR
specifications found their way into the NASA Standard Spacecraft
Computer 1 (NSSC-1), used in earth orbital operations, but the concept
of selective redundancy was not incorporated into flight computers to
the extent desired by Avizienis.

STAR did not find its way to the outer planets for two reasons.
\newpageon{154} One was budget cuts**^[63](Source5.html)^**. Even though the
Voyagers were launched in the late 1970s, the original TOPS program and
the Grand Tour were canceled due to budget constraints. The fact that
Voyager 2 is essentially executing the Grand Tour is a bonus. On-board
computers used on Voyager developed from a different line. So, even
though Avizienis designed a Super-STAR with a microprogrammable
processor using large-scale integration technology, which seemed certain
to fulfill the requirements of size, power, and weight, he never sold it
to JPL**^[64](Source5.html)^**. A second reason STAR never flew was that
engineers were concerned that the STAR's TARP and its failure switches
were a weak point. The concept of a TARP, as with TMR, is always limited
by the question of "who tests the tester?"**^[65](Source5.html)^**. The
actual switches entrusted with powering down a failed component and
charging up another are the weakest link in the system. At one point,
JPL subcontracted to the Stanford Research Institute for work on a
magnetic switch, but apparently the results were not
satisfying**^[66](Source5.html)^**.

The STAR research program was not a waste even though the computer
itself did not fly. It contributed to the development of new, reliable
electronic components, such as those used on NSSC-1. It also provided a
contrast to the development track being taken on the Mariner and Viking
Orbiter spacecraft. One engineer involved in Viking Orbiter computer
development said that STAR-type hardware was considered but deemed too
complex. He thought that a two machine system turning in parallel would
be simpler and as reliable for a Mars
orbiter/lander**^[67](Source5.html)^**. Even though the technology of
computers was not ready for STAR, it remains an innovative design and
one of the few computer research projects funded by NASA. The principles
developed remained valid for possible future applications that JPL was
about to begin.

By far the most direct and far-reaching contribution of the STAR program
to the future of JPL projects was John Rohr's work on the
assembler/linker/loader for the software. It was the basis for the
command sequence translators used through the present. Though
extensively reworked and redesigned, the fundamental concepts were
established by Rohr during the STAR development**^[68](Source5.html)^**.
