### Fixed sequencers: "Computers" on Ranger, Surveyor and the early Mariners

Whether the final mission destination is as close as the
moon or as far as Neptune, probe spaceflights consist of the same
milestones and activities: launch, mid-course maneuver, cruise, and
encounter. Spacecraft are launched in a stowed position dictated by the
geometry of the booster vehicle. Most space probes look like multiarmed
Hindu gods in flight due to the need to expose solar panels, point
antennas, and deploy imaging equipment, but they must be folded to fit
into the nose fairing of a rocket. During the launch period the
spacecraft is injected into its transfer orbit to intercept the target,
deploys its various appendages into their proper positions, and orients
itself. A decision was made early at JPL to build spacecraft that would
be stabilized in three axes during flight**^[1](Source5.html)^**.
Spacecraft would be oriented by using the sun, earth, and/or a star as a
reference. If kept from tumbling they would always be pointed in a
specific direction. A key advantage of this plan is that a directional
antenna could be used for earth-space communications, reducing power
requirements. Imaging equipment could also be more stable than on a
spin-stabilized spacecraft such as a Pioneer. A disadvantage of
three-axis stabilization is that a fairly sophisticated attitude control
system must be carried, including a sensor system to find the sun and a
guide star. Part of the launch phase, then, is spent scanning the sky
for Campus, Vega, or whatever star has been chosen for aligning the
spacecraft.

The mid-course maneuver phase often comes only a day or two after
initial transfer orbit insertion in order to correct relatively large
\newpageon{142} injection errors. Consisting of a timed burn of the
spacecraft's propulsion system in each of three axes, it serves a number
of purposes. Early launches could not depend upon the launch vehicle to
establish a adequate flight path. Later, as booster guidance improved,
probes were purposely aimed to miss the target so as to avoid
contaminating planetary atmospheres with earthly bacteria hitching a
ride on a spacecraft if the spacecraft ceased to function during launch
and could not change its path to miss the planet. Therefore, the
mid-course burn took place to correct the path of a "live" spacecraft.
On long-duration missions with several targets, such as the Voyager
probe to Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, this maneuver might be
repeated before and after each encounter. Engine firings are made before
encounter to improve the accuracy of the trajectory to achieve a better
gravity assist from the target planet to the new trajectory and reduce
the size of the post encounter maneuvers.

Less is done on the spacecraft during the cruise period than in any
other mission phase. However, recent larger and more complicated
spacecraft have particle and fields experiments that run constantly and
engineering calibrations that need periodic attention. If the spacecraft
attitude is disturbed, reorientation may be necessary. This period of
relative quiet ends when the encounter sequences begin as the spacecraft
nears its target. Instruments must be turned on, calibrated and aimed.
Imaging instrument pointing must be programmed and controlled. Data must
be recorded and transmitted to earth. Of course, these activities are
repeated during multiple encounter missions.

Initiating the functions done in each phase requires on-board control.
This was unnecessary for Ranger missions to the moon, which were simple
impact flights with televised imaging during the last minutes. Because
maximum speed-of-light delay in radio signals to the moon is less than a
second, near-real-time commanding could be done. Ground commands could
fire engines, point the spacecraft, and turn on cameras. Ranger flights
used a voice/manual commanding system for this. Desired instructions
were developed and formatted at JPL and then delivered by telephone to
the Deep Space Network station currently in contact with the spacecraft.
An operator would thumb-wheel the octal codes into a panel called the
"Read-Write-Verify Console," sending them to the spacecraft after
verification**^[2](Source5.html)^**. Such care was not always enough. On
Ranger III, a guidance error caused the spacecraft to miss the moon by
23,000 miles. Although JPL flight controllers were able to get images
during the flyby, a documentation discrepancy between the command set
developed during the ground testing of the spacecraft and the flight set
caused Ranger to point the wrong way, returning images of open
space**^[3](Source5.html)^**.

Ranger carried a "Central Computer and Sequencer" to back up the direct
command system. Activated before lift-off, it counted the hours,
minutes, and seconds until a specified mission event was to \newpageon{143}
occur and then executed a set of commands that performed the required
functions. If the uplink radio channel failed, the mission would proceed
according to a prepared plan. This assumed optimum performance, turning
on the cameras regardless of where the spacecraft might be actually
pointing. Still, it provided a bit of insurance for the mission.

At the same time that the Rangers were being built, JPL designed and
flew the first Mariners. Mariner's initial mission was a Venus flyby
launched in 1962. In the case of this spacecraft and its later brethren,
the Central Computer and Sequencer was the prime source of commands, at
least for cruise and encounter portions of the
mission**^[4](Source5.html)^**. The time delay for commands to travel to
Venus and Mars defeats real-time control from the ground. For Mariner
II, at launch time minus 15 minutes, the clock was set so that the
encounter sequence would begin at 12 hours from the closest approach to
Venus. The sequencer's clock, a very accurate oscillator similar to
computer clocks today, started at launch time minus 3
minutes**^[5](Source5.html)^**. Direct commanding capability was
maintained. When the star tracker got confused and locked onto the wrong
target, ground controllers could reinitiate a
search**^[6](Source5.html)^**. Direct command could also be used for
midcourse maneuvers. As a complement to direct command, "quantitative"
commands could be sent to the sequencer for later
use**^[7](Source5.html)^**. For instance, times such as "51 seconds of
minus roll" and "795 seconds of minus pitch" or burn times could be
inserted into the memory for later execution**^[8](Source5.html)^**.
Mariners could abandon direct command and go to automatic command if a
radio failure was detected. On the Mariner Mars 1964 spacecraft the
sequencer contained a cyclic command that checked for such a failure at
66 2/3 hour intervals, effecting an auto
switch-over**^[9](Source5.html)^**.

The Mariner II spacecraft to Venus (1962), Mariner IV to Mars (1964),
and Mariner V to Venus (1967) carried the same Central Computer and
Sequencer. Just one flew on each mission, due to space and weight
restrictions, even though the machine weighed in at 11.5
pounds**^[10](Source5.html)^**. However, with the direct command
capability intact, each had essentially the same level of redundancy as
the Gemini and Apollo spacecraft, with their single-processor on-board
computer systems and ground control computers. Plans for Mariner Mars
1969 called for a larger spacecraft and a more ambitious mission: two
picture-taking flybys of different portions of the "red planet". JPL's
Neil H. Herman, who had headed development of the Sequencer, saw an
opportunity to improve the device for the upcoming
flights**^[11](Source5.html)^**. One aim was to give the new spacecraft
more flexibility. If the first flyby turned up something special, it
would be very useful if the second spacecraft could be reprogrammed in
flight to take advantage of lessons learned on the initial
pass**^[12](Source5.html)^**. This actually happened during the missions
when reprogramming was accomplished for Mariner VII's \newpageon{144} August
5, 1969 flyby in response to Mariner VI's July 31
passage**^[13](Source5.html)^**. Another reason for more on board
autonomy is that command sessions for the Mariners lasted as long as 8
hours! Mariner's command rate was 1 bit per second, so long sequences
were expensive both in personnel time and Deep Space Network
time**^[14](Source5.html)^**. The availability of more space and weight
plus the desire for flexibility and greater autonomy caused JPL to
change the Sequencer to make it more of a computer and less of what it
really was, a fixed-program counter.

![**Figure 5--1**. Mariner Mars 1971 carried a programmable sequencer with an
expanded memory. (JPL photo P12035)](images/p144.jpg)
