### Expanded memory and expanded functions

The new sequencer had a 9-bit address field, providing a 512
address limit. Expanding the memory to 512 words did not require a
change in the logic. So JPL added the extra memory for the Mariner
\pagebreakon{147} Mars 1971 orbiter missions. Still, the old fixed sequencer
remained in charge of the Mars orbit insertion burn. After the
spacecraft established orbits, however, the ground control center used
the new sequencer to control the imaging of Mars and its moons. The
expanded memory proved sufficient. Preflight estimates for Mariner VIII
specified 150 words of memory and 225 words for Mariner IX, yet both
grew to over 400 words in flight^[30](#source5)^.

The mission that used the sequencer to its limits was Mariner Venus
Mercury 1973, or Mariner X. Mission profile called for the spacecraft to
turn its imaging equipment on the earth as it flew toward deep space, do
some studies of the moon in flyby, and then research in the area of
Venus during a gravity assist maneuver that would send it toward
Mercury, where JPL planned three separate encounters with the innermost
planet.

![**Figure 5--2**. Mariner Venus/Mercury 1973 made the most use of the
programmable sequencers. (JPL photo 251-135AC)](images/p147.jpg)

\pagebreakon{148} Due to the more complex mission requirements, the design
team wanted a bigger and better sequencer, but cost constraints killed
any chance of building a new machine^[31](#source5)^. Adrian
Hooke of JPL, one of the project's managers, decided to use planned
memory updates at regular intervals. He also instituted a "suspenders
and belt" approach to reliability. The sequencer would not only carry a
detailed program for the next mission phase but also a constantly
updated bare minimum program to complete the mission if the spacecraft
lost contact with the ground. If a command was not received for a
certain time, then the sequencer would follow whatever commands were in
the backup program. Thus, software moved ahead in leap frog fashion.
During the earth-moon phase the Venus backup was loaded, during the
Venus encounter the backup Mercury encounter sequence was on board, and
so on^[32](#source5)^. Software development was assigned to
three programmers. Ronald Spriestersbach of JPL wrote the near-earth and
post-Mercury sequences, George Elliot of the Boeing Company did the
Venus encounter, and Larry Koga of JPL wrote all three Mercury
encounters^[33](#source5)^.

During the 1969 missions, most changes and subroutines were hand-coded
and used once. By 1971, the COMGEN ground computer program that produced
memory loads for the Sequencer could develop blocks of commands that
functioned much like subroutines in a standard computer program or
macros in an assembly language program^[34](#source5)^ . In
1973, COMGEN resided in an IBM 360/75 computer that generated the
commands and sent them via the NASA communications net to the
appropriate Deep Space Network station for transmission. By this time,
each station had a command computer, thus ending the voice/manual
era^[35](#source5)^. Another improvement to the Sequencer was
that engineers could do memory checks by comparing a sumword stored in
location 512 to the result of summing the first 511 locations. If a
miscompare occurred, *then* a location-by-location check for error could
be made^[36](#source5)^.

The improvements both in the Sequencer and in programming and ground
control techniques were not enough to ensure its use beyond the Mariner
series of spacecraft. In spite of the success of the long and
complicated mission of Mariner X, JPL's Hooke complained that memory
limits were too costly due to excessive need for optimization and
constant relocation of subroutines^[37](#source5)^. Besides, the
sequencers, regardless of their full name, were *not* computers.
Spacecraft needed to do on-board computations, to have more room for
software (and, thus, increased flexibility), and to use the central
computer for other functions such as spacecraft health and safety
monitoring done on other manned and unmanned spacecraft. Some missions
intrinsically needed computers, as, for example, the Viking Mars
orbiters and landers and the Voyager outer planet probes. The computer
eventually designed, built, and used for the Viking Orbiter had its
roots in the programmable sequencer, but it also owed some \pagebreakon{149}
concepts, at least in comparison, to a computer built in the research
side of JPL and aimed at the long-duration, complex missions of the
future. The story of that computer research project adds a necessary
perspective for understanding the direction JPL's on-board computer
development took in the 1970s.
