### From Sequencers to Computers: Exploring the Moon and the Inner Planets

\[**140**\] One organization more than any other has dominated the
exploration of deep space: the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of the
California Institute of Technology. JPL was responsible for the Ranger
and Surveyor series of lunar exploration spacecraft, the Mariner and
Viking Orbiter explorers of Mercury, Venus, and Mars, and the Voyager
and Galileo probes of the outer planets. As a result, the evolution of
on-board computers for deep space operations took place at JPL.

JPL's chief contribution to computing on unmanned spacecraft was in
leading progress from hard-wired sequencers to programmable sequencers
to digital computers. The Pioneer spacecraft developed mostly at NASA's
Ames Research Center and the Lunar Orbiters used to map the moon in the
1960s did not carry on-board computers. Like their earth-orbiting
cousins and the first JPL probes, they used sequencing devices to
activate and command experiments. Later the Mariner spacecraft acquired
more autonomy and flexibility by using machines that stored command
sequences in changeable software. Finally, sophisticated spacecraft flew
with special-purpose digital computers.

Unique in its relationship to NASA, JPL is not solely a government
installation in the same way as, for example, the Johnson or Marshall
Space flight Centers. JPL's personnel receive their pay-checks from Cal
Tech, yet almost every piece of equipment on the site has a NASA
property tag, since, for over a quarter of a century, Cal Tech has
administered contracts that have paid for all research and development
of the many spacecraft originated at JPL.

Another way in which JPL is unique is its products. Whereas thousands of
earth-orbiting satellites have been launched, less than a dozen each of
Rangers, Surveyors, and Mariners were constructed, and just two Vikings
and Voyagers and one Galileo were sent into space. Not only were few
spacecraft built, but the interplanetary launches were separated by
years and had to be on strict deadlines due to the realities of
celestial mechanics. This created a completely different development
environment than that at other NASA centers. The emphasis on basic
research at JPL has perhaps been stronger than at any other NASA
installation. This orientation and its application in spacecraft forms a
special part of the story of JPL.

JPL's computer development activities were shaped by its organizational
structures. When a project is started at the Laboratory, an office is
established to house the project manager, key systems managers, and
staff. Offices have come and gone with the projects themselves. The
Ranger office, for example, has been closed for nearly 20 years, whereas
the Voyager office is likely to be open for as long as that. Most
personnel are housed in divisions and sections relating to specific
discipline or system functions, as, in 1984, the "Technical Divisions"
contained sections on "Guidance and Control" and "Spacecraft Data
Systems." When a project office needs a component or service, it
"subcontracts" it to the appropriate technical \[**141**\] sections. For
instance, Spacecraft Data Systems supplies on-board computers, whereas
the Navigation Systems Section does the trajectory calculations needed
for a specific mission. In this way, specialists can be kept busy on a
series of projects over a period of years without depending on a
specific project for their jobs. Competition between sections to develop
related components can also exist, as on the Voyager project, when the
attitude control staff wanted to make their own computer for their
system while the data systems people claimed sole domain over computer
development. Within this setting, JPL has produced high quality on-board
computers that have demonstrated outstanding reliability[^5-1a].

[^5-1a]: JPL's roots and its role in NASA receive excellent treatment in
Clayton Koppes' The Jet Propulsion Lab and the American Space Program,
Yale University Press, 1982.
