### Programmable sequencers: Mariners\ to\ Mars,\ Venus\ and\ Mercury

Mariner Mars 1969 carried a 26-pound, programmable Central
Computer and Sequencer designed by Herman and his team at JPL and built
by Motorola^[15](Source5.html)^. The machine originated in studies
done in 1964--1965 for a Mars orbiter and lander called "Voyager" and
Mariner Mars 1966, neither of which flew^[16](Source5.html)^. The
major difference between the fixed sequencers and the programmable
sequencer is that it had a memory of 128 words that could be altered in
flight. Although this device had far greater flexibility and
capabilities than the fixed sequencers, one of the older sequencers
traveled on the spacecraft as a backup. During critical maneuvers, the
two sequencers would run in parallel, a disagreement causing an abort of
the maneuver. The Sequencer commanded all spacecraft systems, including
the Attitude and Pointing System and Flight Data System, each of which
evolved to include their own computers by the time JPL designed the
outer planets Voyager in the 1970s.

\pagebreakon{145} Original requirements for Mariner Mars 1969 called for 20
words of memory, making the 128-word version more than enough. Yet the
memory was quickly exceeded, necessitating the use of "creative"
programming techniques for the duration of the mission. Fortunately, the
Sequencer was reprogrammable in flight. Memory locations used for
terminated mission phases could be given to tasks scheduled for later.
Edward Greenberg of JPL, who did most of the programming, replaced the
launch and mid-course burn routines with new code after they had been
executed^[17](Source5.html)^.

Despite the autonomy and flexibility gained by using the programmable
Central Computer and Sequencer, the two Mariner Mars 1969 missions were
the "most commanded" to that date. Mariner VI received 946 radio
commands, Mariner VII got 957; either number exceeded the total number
of commands sent to all the three previous successful missions
combined^[18](Source5.html)^. One of the reasons for this was the
memory restrictions; another could be that the engineers on the project
downplayed the full capabilities of the Sequencer, not realizing what
was possible^[19](Source5.html)^. However, the full capabilities of
the device were more than exercised on the last Mariner missions.

<div class="inbox">Box 5-1: Programmable Central Computer and Sequencer Architecture and Software

The new Central Computer and Sequencer had no accumulator or central
registers common to standard computers. Each memory location could be
used as a register, and all operations began at a location, acted on the
contents of another location, and ended in a third memory
location^[20](Source5.html)^. Memory consisted of 22-bit words
stored in magnetic core, with destructive serial
readout^[21](Source5.html)^. Three types of words could be stored.
An instruction word used the first 4 bits for one of the 16 operation
codes, the next 9 for the address of the memory location to be acted on,
and the last 9 for the address of where to go
afterward^[22](Source5.html)^. Instruction DHJ meant "decrement
hours and jump," so the computer would subtract one from the time
portion of the event word stored in the location specified by the first
address in the instruction and then jump to the location specified by
the second address. An event word contained a 13-bit time, scaled to
hours, minutes, or seconds, and a 9-bit address of where to go to start
the event being timed when the time part zeroed^[23](Source5.html)^.
For instance, if the event word was timing the mid-course correction
burn, when the time portion reached zero, a branch would occur to the
specified address, the first address of the mid-course maneuver
subroutine. The last type of word was a data word, containing 22 bits of
data.

\pagebreakon{146} An instruction set of 16 operation codes contained mostly
counting-type instructions: five scaled decrementing instructions
(countdown hours, minutes, seconds, variables), and an incrementing
instruction (count and jump). There was an ADD and a SUBtract, each
requiring 27 milliseconds of machine time, by far the slowest
instructions. Programmers used those very rarely, as the other
instructions were better suited to sequencing. Subtraction was in one's
complement form.

The sequencer executed the software by making a scan of the first seven
instructions each hour^[24](Source5.html)^. Those instructions
constituted the entire executive! They contained sufficient decrement
and branching instructions to check if anything needed to be done during
that hour of flight. As an example, the exec might contain a counter
that kept track of the time to an imaging session. The resulting routine
might look like this:^[25](Source5.html)^

1. Count 123 hours from start.

2. Count 45 minutes.

3. Activate camera and start frame count.

4. At 29th frame, start sending images.

5. At 32nd frame, rotate filter wheel to blue.

6. At 93rd frame, stop scan and stow platform.

7. Resume cruise mode counting.

After resuming cruise mode, the spacecraft clock would activate a scan
at hour intervals again. Mission control could interrupt a scan, or a
quiet time, and cause a jump to a specified
subroutine^[26](Source5.html)^. (The entire Mariner Mars 1969 flight
program is reproduced in Appendix IV.)

A memory location could be changed by issuing two consecutive commands
from earth stations. JPL called these commands CC-1 and CC-2. CC-1 sent
the address and the least significant 7 bits of the new word, and it
caused an interrupt in the receiving Sequencer. CC-2 relayed the most
significant 15 bits and released the scan
inhibit^[27](Source5.html)^. A related command, CC-3, caused the
Central Computer and Sequencer to read out the contents of a specified
memory location, 1 bit per second^[28](Source5.html)^. Input was
even slower, requiring an average of 2 minutes per word, compared with a
ground-loading time of all 128 words in less than a
minute^[29](Source5.html)^.

</div>
