\newpageon{203}

### Future unmanned spacecraft computers

Distribution of computers aboard spacecraft has now been
done several times. Both Voyager spacecraft inherited command computers
from the Viking project. Computers for specific functions such as
attitude control and data formatting were added in response to increased
requirements. The result was a functionally distributed system of
processors. Galileo's project managers also adopted the concept of
functional distribution, assigning microprocessors to control attitude
and, in the lower-level modules of the Command and Data Subsystem, to
connect to engineering and other instruments, including the scientific
experiments. Additional innovations on the Galileo spacecraft centered
on the development of virtual machine software, which distributes
functions over several processors.

Advancing microprocessor technology makes the continuation of the
concept of single function computers more attractive. At JPL, plans are
currently under way for the Mariner Mark II, which will be the deep
space version of the Multimission Modular Spacecraft developed by
Goddard Space Flight Center for earth orbital operations. Using the same
concepts of a standard bus and modular equipment, JPL hopes to reduce
mission costs to \$400 million each, about half the price of
Galileo**^[147](Source6.html)^**. The staff is exploring the use of the
C programming language, a very powerful tool, for the new spacecraft.
Future missions seem certain to use multicomputers, with internal
networks similar to Galileo's. In the 15 years since the first primitive
programmable sequencers flew with 128 word memories, JPL spacecraft have
grown to carry 2,500 times more memory. Progressing from simple counting
to complex coordinate transformations in such a short time is
remarkable, and the application of computer power to each spacecraft
function will make for ever more remarkable gains.
