\pagebreakon{172}

### Distributed computing on board Voyager and Galileo

Voyager and Galileo are two outer planetary spacecraft that
carry extensive computing capability. In spectacular encounters with
Jupiter and Saturn, Voyagers 1 and 2 returned science data and imaging
that far exceeded results of previous planetary flybys. Uranus was the
successful 1986 objective of Voyager 2, nearly 10 years after launch.
Galileo is designed for a Jupiter orbiter and probe
mission[^6-1a]. Both types of spacecraft carry multiple
computer systems, distributing functions among several machines, rather
than using one central computer system as on the Viking Orbiter and
Lander.

Distributed computing on large unmanned spacecraft developed
conceptually from several sources. In 1967, Marshall Space Flight Center
commissioned a study by General Electric Corporation's Missile and Space
Division in Philadelphia as part of preparation for a huge "Voyager"
Mars lander to be launched on a Saturn V booster in the early 1970s.
Marshall asked GE to compare the advantages of a central computer
configuration versus separate computers for different subsystems.
General Electric used a highly mathematical approach to develop power,
size, and weight comparisons of the different proposals in light of
reliability considerations. Computer physical limits were set as high as
100 pounds and 300 watts due to the large size of the booster. This
would allow computers such as the IBM 4Pi series, Autonetics D26J, and
IBM's Saturn Launch Vehicle Digital Computer (LVDC) to be considered.
Planners expected that the functions that later showed up on advanced
Mariners-such as accelerometers, programmable sequencers with 512 words
of memory, and telemetry registers-would be part of the proposed
computer's capabilities and responsibilities. However, GE found that
economies gained by a central system were outweighed by reliability
advantages intrinsic to a distributed system**^[1](Source6.html)^**.

Another approach came from Edward Greenberg, a Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL) engineer who programmed for the Mariner VI and VII Central
Computer and Sequencer and contributed to the Viking Command Computer
Subsystem (CCS) design. In December, 1972, he proposed that the Viking
computer be standardized as a multimission
processor**^[2](Source6.html)^**. His intent was to reuse hardware and
software development tools such as assemblers and simulators. Since one
Viking computer could never handle all the functions needed on Voyager,
several computers, each with a limited domain of functions, were needed.

Aside from the GE study and Greenberg's proposal, JPL
\pagebreakon{173} developed an additional argument for distributed computing.
Edward H. Kopf, Jr., a JPL engineer specializing in attitude control,
pointed out that different sections of the Laboratory needed computers
to perform their assignments on Voyager and Galileo. Each group wanted
its "own" computer, so that it would not be constantly competing for
resources with other groups**^[3](Source6.html)^**. Therefore, a
distributed system would help keep the peace.

The attractions of distributing computing, reliability, potential
reusability, and separation of tasks, proved true in the development of
the Voyager and Galileo spacecraft. Each has a functionally distributed
set of computers. Voyager makes use of two of the Viking machines and a
third, custom-built, computer. Each concentrates on processing different
functions, such as attitude control, data formatting, and commanding.
Galileo has dual processors for attitude control and six in a network
for command and data handling. Both spacecraft were designed for
long-duration, autonomous flight, a goal difficult to attain without the
use of distribution.

![**Figure 6--1**. The Voyager spacecraft with the radioisotope generators on
the left boom and the scan platform on the right boom. (JPL photo
P10727B)](images/p173.jpg)

[^6-1a]: Originally set for launch in the early 1980s, the
mission slipped to May of 1986, but the grounding of the Shuttle fleet
and cancellation of the Shuttle Centaur upper stage program in early
1986 led to an indefinite postponement and probably a change of launch
vehicle.
