\newpageon{173}

### Voyager - The flying computer center

After the cancellation of the Thermoelectric Outer Planet
Spacecraft (TOPS) project as such, JPL proposed, and NASA funded, a
project called Mariner-Jupiter-Saturn 1977. It was given the name
\[**174**\] Voyager in the mid-1970s. Although TOPS' original mission
was to conduct the Grand Tour of the four gas giant planets, Voyager was
limited to flybys of the innermost two, Jupiter and Saturn. However,
favorable gravity assists and hardware longevity made it possible to
plan for a Uranus flyby by the Voyager 2 spacecraft and, potentially, a
Neptune encounter. After visiting Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 is to
travel out of the plane of the planetary orbits and leave the solar
system.

Voyager employs three dual-redundant computer systems per spacecraft.
The first, the CCS, is nearly identical to that flown on Viking,
performing sequencing and spacecraft health functions along with new
ones necessitated by the addition of the other computers. Telemetry data
formatting and transmission handled by the Flight Data System are done
on Voyager with the help of a custom-built computer. Attitude control
and articulation of the scan platform are accomplished with the third
computer system. One concept from the STAR computer proposed for the
TOPS, applicable to Voyager, is dormancy. JPL's project staff believed
that equipment would last longer if unpowered**^[4](Source6.html)^**.
Although both CCSs are always powered, rarely are both Flight Data
Systems running, and both attitude control computers are never turned on
at the same time. Full bit-for-bit redundancy is not maintained in the
dual memories. For example, "expended" algorithms, such as the
deployment sequence executed shortly after separation from the booster,
need not be maintained**^[5](Source6.html)^**. Both memories are
accessed by the single active processor in each system. The Flight Data
System keeps a copy of its instructions in both memories, but
intermediate data and variables can be stored in either memory. This
seemingly casual attitude toward memory duplication tightens up
considerably near encounter periods, which is one time that both CCS
processors are in tandem mode.

Since there are three computer systems on Voyager, JPL had to establish
another layer of organizational control over its flight hardware and
software development. Whereas Viking was assigned a single Cognizant
Software Engineer, Voyager had three, managed by a Spacecraft Software
Engineer. H. Kent Frewing of JPL assumed this position in early 1974 and
sent out a series of organizing memos during the first half of that
year[^6-2a]. Frewing's February 20, 1974 note set out his
duties and a project time line through the summer 1977 launch
dates**^[6](Source6.html)^**. Manpower estimates for software
development ranged from one programmer in 1974 and 1977, with a peak of
four full-time programmers in late 1975. The small group allowed most
work to be \[**175**\] done informally, easing communication. To provide
some structure, Frewing established a Mariner-Jupiter-Saturn 1977
On-Board Software Design Team consisting of himself, Donald R. Johnson,
the Flight Data System Cog Engineer, Stanley Lingon, the CCS Cog
Engineer, and an Attitude and Articulation Control System
representative**^[7](Source6.html)^**. They helped ensure the same close
control of software development as on Viking, with good documentation
and effective subroutine interfaces. The validation end of the software
development process was handled by the Capability Demonstration
Laboratory (CDL). Completed after the initial software was produced, it
was a collection of either breadboard or flight surplus computer and
science hardware, and its interfaces interconnected in the same way as
those on the actual spacecraft. Its function is identical to that of the
Shuttle Avionics Integration Laboratory (SAIL), in which both software
and hardware changes could be tested to see if they functioned
successfully**^[8](Source6.html)^**. Under this management umbrella, and
with Cog Engineers constantly elucidating requirements from the science
side and interpreting them to software engineers, each of the three
computer systems took shape.

#### Voyager CCS: Parameters and Problems

NASA reeled from massive budget cuts during the 1970s. A changed
political climate ended the Apollo era of near "carte blanche." Hampered
by expensive Shuttle contracts as well as other factors, NASA management
reduced its plans for unmanned exploration of the solar system. As
Voyager developed under the new conditions, cost savings became a key
ingredient in all engineering evaluations. JPL thus conducted a "CCS/CCS
Memory Subsystem Design Inheritance Review" on January 17,
1974**^[9](Source6.html)^**. Held a year after Greenberg's proposal for
standardizing the Viking computer, the Review resulted in the adoption
of the Viking CCS as the Voyager CCS. The eventual hardware functional
requirements document reads like a copy of the Viking
document**^[10](Source6.html)^**. I/O interfaces with the new Flight
Data System and Attitude Articulation and Control System computers are
the major differences. Software such as the command decoder, certain
fault processing routines, and others are fundamentally identical to
Viking**^[11](Source6.html)^**. Here again, differences are related to
the new computers. All command changes and memory loads for the other
computers are routed through the CCS**^[12](Source6.html)^**. This
required the addition of the routine MEMLOAD**^[13](Source6.html)^**.
Another routine, AACSIN, was added to evaluate power codes sent from the
Attitude Control computer as a "heartbeat" to inform the CCS of its
health**^[14](Source6.html)^**. The frequency of the heartbeat, roughly
30 times per minute, caused concern \[**176**\] that the CCS would be
worn out processing it. Mission Operations estimated that the CCS would
have to be active 3% to 4% of the time, whereas the Viking Orbiter
computer had trouble if it was more than 0.2%
active**^[15](Source6.html)^**. As it turns out, this worry was
unwarranted.

Part of the reason why the more complex Voyager spacecraft could be
controlled by a computer with the same size memory as Viking is the
ability to change software loads. In-flight reprogramming, begun when
the programmable sequencers flew on Mariners, and brought to a state of
high quality on Mariner X, was a nearly routine task by the time of
Voyager's launch in 1977. Both the CCS and Flight Data System computer
have been reprogrammed extensively. No less than 18 loads were uplinked
to Voyager l during its Jupiter encounter. During long-duration cruise,
such as between Saturn and Uranus, new loads are spaced to every 3
months**^[16](Source6.html)^**. As pioneered on Mariner X, a disaster
backup sequence was stored in the Voyager 2 CCS memory for the Uranus
encounter, and later for the Neptune encounter. Required because of the
loss of redundancy after the primary radio receiver developed an
internal short, the backup sequence will execute minimum experiment
sequences and transmit data to earth; it occupies 20% of the 4K
memory**^[17](Source6.html)^**. CCS programmers are studying ways to use
some bit positions in a failed Flight Data System memory to compensate
for the shortened memory in their system. A readout register in the
Flight Data System has a failed bit, giving the impression that the
entire memory has a one stored in that position in each word. Remaining
"good" areas may be assigned to the use of the
CCS**^[18](Source6.html)^**.

#### Voyager Attitude Articulation and Control System Computer

JPL has been committed to three-axis stabilized spacecraft since it
began designing probes in 1959. Attitude control systems maintain the
proper pointing. The tasks assigned to the systems later expanded to
include the actual operation of scanning platforms for imaging and other
remote sensing instrument pointing. On the early Mariner missions the
control systems consisted of analog circuits made up of hard-wired
logic. By Mariner VIII, digital circuits replaced the analog
electronics, and those were used on Mariner X as well as the Viking
Orbiter**^[19](Source6.html)^**. Viking's Lander used the Honeywell
central computer to run its independent attitude control
system**^[20](Source6.html)^**. A landing craft engaged in a powered
descent needed far finer pointing than a spacecraft in free flight, and
the bandwidth of a hard-wired system was insufficient to provide such
control**^[21](Source6.html)^**.

Future probes, however, might need computer-controlled attitude
electronics due to complex mission requirements or unusual
\[**177**\] spacecraft configurations. NASA's Office of Aeronautics and
Space Technology funded a study of extended life attitude control
systems as the TOPS project wound down in 1972. The result was a
combination analog and digital programmable attitude control system.
Dubbed "HYPACE," for Hybrid Programmable Attitude Control Electronics,
it was a byte-serial processor with substantial
power**^[22](Source6.html)^**. Using the same 4K, 18-bit-wide
plated-wire memory from the Viking Orbiter computer, HYPACE added
transistor-transistor logic (TTL) medium-scale integrated circuits to
create a relatively fast (28-microsecond cycle) processor with index
registers for addressing. Byte-serial architecture was possible because
the TTL chips were designed for 4-bit parallel operation, so the 18-bit
words could be moved around in five cycles instead of the 18 a serial
machine would need, increasing overall speed. Index registering meant
that the same block of code could be used for all three axes, reducing
memory requirements. It appeared that the attitude control systems of
future spacecraft would almost certainly benefit from such a computer.

Voyager was the first to do so, due to new requirements. One difference
between Voyager and Mariner and Viking is that the latter two were
fairly rigid in construction. Voyager's radioisotope thermoelectric
generators, however, were mounted on a boom to keep radiation leakage
away from scientific instruments. In addition, the magnetometer was boom
mounted to avoid interference from spacecraft magnetic fields caused by
motors, actuators, power buses, and electronics. Finally, the scan
platform was also on a boom to give a better field of view. The extended
booms made Voyager much less rigid in flight, with thruster firings and
maneuvers causing the booms to flex, complicating the attitude control
problem**^[23](Source6.html)^**. Additionally, the Titan III booster
used for Voyager required a "kick stage" to successfully inject Voyager
into the transfer orbit to Jupiter. Since the kick stage was kept
simple, the spacecraft itself was required to do attitude control during
firing, which entailed much narrower margins of control than the
three-axis pointing in cruise**^[24](Source6.html)^**.

JPL's Guidance and Control Section wanted to use a version of HYPACE as
the computer for the Voyager. However, there was considerable pressure
to build on the past and use existing equipment**^[25](Source6.html)^**.
Greenberg proposed using the same Viking computer in all systems on the
Voyager spacecraft that needed one**^[26](Source6.html)^**. A study
showed that the attitude control system could use the CCS computer, but
the Flight Data System could not due to high I/O
requirements**^[27](Source6.html)^**. Wayne Kohl, the Viking computer
Cog Engineer, thought that the Voyager project could save \$300,000 by
using the Viking machine for the attitude control
function**^[28](Source6.html)^**. His division chief, John Scull,
supported that idea, possibly because of budget pressure from
NASA**^[29](Source6.html)^**. Raymond L. Heacock, as Spacecraft Systems
Manager in the Voyager Project Office, and others from that organization
were the key personnel \[**178**\] involved in making the final
decision, influenced by the economy and feasibility of the
idea**^[30](Source6.html)^**. Money could be saved in two ways by using
the existing system: avoidance of new development costs and retraining
of personnel.

Guidance and Control grudgingly accepted the CCS computer on the
condition it be speeded up. Requirements for active control during the
kick stage burn meant that real-time control programs would have to be
written to operate within a 20-millisecond cycle, roughly three times
faster than the command computer**^[31](Source6.html)^**. An executive
for the attitude control computer differed in nature from those for
either the command computer or the Flight Data System computer.
Basically, the attitude control computer needed to run subprograms at
different rates, requiring several cycles, as in Apollo, Skylab, and the
Shuttle. Guidance and Control asked for a 1-megahertz clock speed but
wound up getting about three quarters of that**^[32](Source6.html)^**.
The attitude control engineers also added the index registers that
proved so useful during the HYPACE experiment. Documentation for the
system still refers to the attitude control computer as HYPACE, even
though its heart was the command computer. General Electric, which built
the command computer, naturally built HYPACE, but the rest of the
attitude control system was constructed by Martin-Marietta Corporation
in Denver.

Teoguer A. Almaguer was the hardware Cog Engineer for the attitude
control computer, whereas H. Karl Bouvier led the software development
group. Bouvier actually worked on an analysis team within the Guidance
and Control Section, but the team members were afraid to use the word
"software" in their name because their tasks might have been taken away
and given to an existing software team in another
division**^[33](Source6.html)^**. The programmers must have done an
outstanding job, considering the slow processor and limited memory. At
launch, only two words of free space remained in the 4K of plated
wire**^[34](Source6.html)^**. Tight memory is now a problem because the
scan platform actuators on Voyager 2 are nearly worn out, and software
has to compensate for this during Uranus and Neptune encounter periods.

\newpageon{179}

<div class="inbox">Box 6-1: Voyager HYPACE Operation

HYPACE had four execution rates. Scan platform stepper motors and
thruster actuators were among the routines executed during the
10-millisecond cycle. Attitude control laws and thruster logic executed
in the 20-millisecond cycle. Scanning control and turn execution were
placed in the 60-millisecond group, and the command interpreter and
heartbeat were 240-millisecond routines**^[35](Source6.html)^**. In
operation, the standard 10-millisecond time interrupt would cause all
10-millisecond routines to execute. It was time for one of the 20-, 60-,
or 240-millisecond routines to run, it would be scheduled. Sometimes if
the computer got too busy, the 240-millisecond cycle slipped to up to
350 milliseconds, but routines in that cycle were less critical than a
routine to shut off an engine on time.

One thing needed on Voyager that did not exist when only single
computers flew on unmanned spacecraft was an interface between the
machines. The command computer could directly request data from either
of its partners. A primary function of the command computer was to check
periodically on the health of the other computers. Programmers in the
Guidance and Control Section originally intended to send a "heartbeat"
to the command computer each second**^[36](Source6.html)^**. This was
later raised to once about every 2 seconds, partly because of the
command computer overload problem mentioned above. To carry the
heartbeat, six direct input lines, similar to the 3-bit synchronization
bus on the Shuttle, ran from the HYPACE to the command computer. A
"power code" was the content of the 6 bits transmitted on those lines.
For example, power code 37 was the simple heartbeat. Others related to
passing information such as pointing commands. Power code 66, called
"the Omen," told the command computer to save disaster parameters,
because a failure was imminent**^[37](Source6.html)^**. Every eight
240-millisecond cycles the heartbeat was sent. Between times, the
attitude control computer conducted its self tests. If it failed, the
heartbeat generator was bypassed. After about 10 seconds passed with no
heartbeats, the command computer would issue a switch-over command to
the backup processor.

A switch-over to the backup attitude control computer took place on
Voyager 2 16 seconds after separation from the solid rocket
stage**^[38](Source6.html)^**. Separation was so rough that the
spacecraft was sent off attitude. Simultaneously, the booms were being
deployed by the command computer. A thruster configuration
initialization involving the plumbing for the thrusters delayed their
acting to correct the attitude error.

\[**180**\] Since this was one of the mission-critical times that the
command computer was turning in dual mode, the attitude control computer
got two commands to initiate the plumbing. Executing the second command
pushed back the attitude control recovery even farther. Soon the
computer exhausted its options and voluntarily stopped the heartbeat.
When the backup came on-line it had no record of the gyro readings. Not
knowing how bad things were was a blessing, as it executed a simple
orientation and stopped the spacecraft roll**^[39](Source6.html)^**.
Here is an instance where maintaining bit-for-bit identical memories
would have been disastrous, as the backup computer would also have tied
itself in knots.

</div>

#### Developing Voyager's Flight Data System Computer

Flight Data Systems handle the collection, formatting, and storage of
science and engineering data on spacecraft. If the data are to be
transmitted directly, a high rate of input and output is needed so that
nothing is lost. If data transmission is deferred because a spacecraft
is occulted from the tracking station, then the Flight Data System sends
the data to a magnetic tape recorder known as the Data Storage System
(DSS). As JPL progressed through Ranger to Surveyor to Mariner and to
Viking, the rates of the data-handling requirements went steadily
upward. This was because of increased instrumentation, greater
sophistication in the spacecraft engineering systems, imaging equipment
with better resolution (thus needing higher bit rates), and improved
communications equipment permitting faster transmission of data. These
changes led away from hard-wired Flight Data systems. One big step was
the use of a digital memory on Viking to store different sequences of
data handling. It was much like the microprogram in a central processor
and for a similar purpose: to save hardware**^[40](Source6.html)^**.
From there it was a short step to a full-fledged computer.

TOPS feasibility studies refer to a Measurement Processor Subsystem, the
first time a separate computer was considered for flight
data**^[41](Source6.html)^**. Although the command computer had been
suggested as a possible Flight Data System machine, JPL engineers soon
realized that even though the processing part of the job was well within
the power of the computer, the I/O rates precluded its use.

JPL commissioned the development of a new computer from scratch and
assigned Jack L. Wooddell to the job. Wooddell prepared an unusual
document to tell the story of his work on the computer: a paper for a
graduate computer science course taught by Dr. Melvin Breuer at the
University of Southern California. Written around 1974, the paper
includes what appears to be the flight version of the \[**181**\]
design**^[42](Source6.html)^**. In it Wooddell lists the tasks he
performed during the design period. He began by preparing a list of
functions that the proposed Flight Data System was required to provide.
These included sending control signals to sequence the science
instruments, the ability to handle a wide variety of data rates and
formats from the various instruments, potential for redesigning the
mission in flight (as is now being done), monitoring engineering
telemetry, and keeping to the reliability standard that no single
failure result in loss of data from more than one scientific instrument
or one-half the engineering sensors**^[43](Source6.html)^**.

![Figure 6-2. The Flight Data System hardware in its package. (JPL photo
360-751AC)](images/p181.jpg)

After determining requirements, Wooddell examined possible hardware and
software tradeoffs. In an insightful memorandum, John Morecroft
explained the concept of "soft logic" as a complement to the "hard
logic" in the Flight Data System**^[44](Source6.html)^**. Writing in
1975, when the actual flight software began to be prepared, Morecroft
pointed out that the program for the computer was actually a soft
representation of hard-wired circuits. Conceptually, the memo stands as
an explanation of the essential meaning of firmware in general. During
the second phase of his work, Wooddell determined which functions could
be handled by hardware and which should be left to the flexibility of
\[**182**\] software. With those decisions made, a preliminary
instruction set and logic design could be prepared.

Uniquely, Wooddell began working with a programmer in 1973, as soon as
the instructions were ready**^[45](Source6.html)^**. Richard J. Rice of
JPL began by developing software for a breadboard version of the data
computer. The breadboard originally used the ubiquitous 4K memory of
plated wire with 18-bit words and 150 of the same low-power TTL ICs used
in other JPL machines**^[46](Source6.html)^**. Instruction execution
times for this version ranged from 12 to 24 microseconds. Rice's
prototype flight program, developed on the basis of what was then known
about Voyager instrumentation and previous experience, showed that the
processor speed should be doubled**^[47](Source6.html)^**.

Two significant hardware changes solved this problem. One hardware
modification added direct memory access circuits and provided for using
them on each instruction cycle. Direct memory access capability meant
that some data could be sent directly to the memory without having to go
through the central processor. In other computers, direct memory access
is permitted as a sort of interrupt and is often referred to as "cycle
stealing" because it takes time away from instruction execution. In the
data computer, it would have been foolhardy to do direct memory access
in that way because the data rate was so high that the instructions
might never get a chance to be executed quickly enough for time-critical
sequencing. Wooddell solved this by adding a direct memory access cycle
to those instructions that did not already have cycles in which the
memory was accessed**^[48](Source6.html)^**. By adding that cycle all
the instructions took the same time to execute regardless of direct
memory access, making it easier to predict program run times and to
guarantee the memory access rate**^[49](Source6.html)^**. Rice, who
suggested the change, later said that his programming job would have
been impossible without it**^[50](Source6.html)^**.

The second hardware modification to Voyager's data computer led to a
first in spaceflight computing: volatile memory. After the first round
of prototype programs, an intermediate hardware design evolved using
CMOS ICs**^[51](Source6.html)^**. This type of circuit is very low
powered, fast, and can tolerate a wide range of voltages, making it
excellent for space use. Early in the 1970s, CMOS was still relatively
new, so it was with some risk that JPL chose the circuits. To go along
with the new CMOS processor, the data computer group fought for CMOS
memories as well. Trying to drive a slow plated-wire memory with fast
CMOS circuits would have negated the attempt to speed up the computer.
However, CMOS memories are volatile, in that if power is cut off, the
data stored in them disappear. The designers of previous manned and
unmanned spacecraft avoided volatile memories, fearing that power
transients would destroy the memories at critical mission times. Voyager
management had to be convinced that the risk was acceptable.

\[**183**\] James T. Kinsey, a JPL manager, was instrumental in getting
the semiconductor memory accepted because a method of providing backup
power was devised**^[52](Source6.html)^**. Voyager's primary electricity
is alternating current. The radioisotope generators produce direct
current, which is converted. By running a separate power line from the
direct current bus fed by the generators to the CMOS memories, the only
way power would be lost is if a major catastrophe destroyed the
generators. If that happened there would not be any need for a data
computer anyway. Enough voltage is supplied to retain the information in
memory and in the registers in the processor that contain the state
vector**^[53](Source6.html)^**. Success with the CMOS memory led to the
adoption of all CMOS circuits in both computer systems on the Galileo
spacecraft. Along with the new chips, the memory changed with an
expansion to 8K. Two "external" address bits were added to flag whether
the top or bottom half of the memory is being
accessed**^[54](Source6.html)^**. One bit is used to select the memory
half used for data access; the other, for the half used for instruction
access.

Eventually, the cycle of prototyping and interaction between Rice and
Wooddell stopped as a final design was accepted. Wooddell wrote that the
extensive use of breadboards instead of paper designs optimized the
process**^[55](Source6.html)^**. His method, although not strictly
"software first" was certainly software sensitive. Martin-Marietta's
experiences with a software first philosophy as described in the
previous chapter indicate that Wooddell had a clearer idea of his
objective than did Martin. The job done on the Flight Data Systems
computer is a good model of fine engineering practice in developing a
total system.

#### Voyager Flight Data System Software

The original software development for the data computer has essentially
been a two-man show since 1975, beginning when Edgar M. Blizzard joined
Richard Rice to develop the flight version of the code. Others have been
involved in testing and management, but these two JPL engineers have
been the key programmers for the entire mission to date. They sit in the
same area as the "Laboratory Test Set," an Interdata computer and
peripherals that contain the software simulator of the data computer and
the assembler and flight load generator. Across from them is the CDL,
the loose conglomeration of hardware that represents the real
spacecraft. From start to validation to release, their tools were within
sight, and certainly hearing, since the room is filled with the constant
hum of spinning disks, occasional clattering printers, and the
undefinable sound of computers crunching numbers.

Rice characterized the unique nature of the data computer software this
way: "We didn't worry about top-down or structured;....

\newpageon{184}

<div class="inbox">Box 6-2: Voyager Flight Data System Computer Architecture

Voyager's data computer is different from most small general-purpose
computers in several ways. Its special registers are kept in memory,
permitting a large number (128) of them. Wooddell also wrote more
powerful shift and rotate instructions because of data-handling
requirements. Despite its I/O rate, the arithmetic rate is quite slow,
mostly due to byte-serial operation. This meant 4-bit bytes are operated
on in sequence. Since the word size of the machine is 16 bits, it takes
six cycles to do an add, including housekeeping
cycles**^[56](Source6.html)^**. If all the arithmetic, logic and
shifting were not done in the general registers, the machine would have
been even slower. Reflecting its role, in addition to the usual ADD,
SUB, AND, OR, and XOR instructions found on most computers, the data
computer has many incrementing, decrementing, and machines instructions
among the 36 defined for the flight version of the
machine**^[57](Source6.html)^**.

Overall, the Flight Data System requires 14 watts of power and weighs
16.3 kilograms**^[58](Source6.html)^**. Its computer needs just one
third of a watt and 10 volts, less than the power required for a
temperature sensor**^[59](Source6.html)^**! At first the estimated
throughput required was 20,000 16-bit words per
seconds**^[60](Source6.html)^**. By flight time, the instruction
execution rate was 80,000 per second, with data rates of 115,000 bits
per second, much higher than previous Flight Data
Systems**^[61](Source6.html)^** . The dual processor/dual memory
architecture of the command computer and attitude control computer is
repeated in the data computer. There was no provision for automatic
switch-over in case of failure. A command from the ground routed by the
command computer is necessary for
reconfiguration**^[62](Source6.html)^**. Note that the attitude control
computer can be switched by the command computer without ground
intervention because it is much more critical to retain orientation.

</div>

....we just defined functions"**^[63](Source6.html)^**. One important
function is the software's provision of basic timing for the entire
spacecraft, not just itself. It is also required to provide the
capability to read out the memories of all three computers, under orders
of the command computer**^[64](Source6.html)^**. Don Johnson, the Cog
Engineer, determined other requirements and interfaces with the
scientific instruments. Rice called him "Mr. PDS," claiming that Johnson
often knew more about the scientific instruments than the scientists
themselves: "If someone forgot something, Johnson knew
it"**^[65](Source6.html)^**. Raymond L. Heacock, Voyager Project
Manager, said that Johnson was largely responsible for the overall
success of the system, including the design**^[66](Source6.html)^**.
Rice said that Johnson's ebullient style and competence worked well in
the informal mode in which the data computer requirements were set,
which was a fully iterative process. New software needs continued to be
discovered during the mission, which is one reason why a programmable
machine \[**185**\] was chosen. For example, at one point Rice and
Blizzard were asked to create software to determine where the limbs of
satellites were so that imaging could be
started**^[67](Source6.html)^**. Development of some programs was
deferred until after launch, such as the Saturn encounter program, when
better data on the telecommunications rates and specific science
requirements would be available**^[68](Source6.html)^**.

Allowing for constant change mandated certain controls over the data
computer's memory. A limit of 90% capacity was set in 1976 by Frewing,
the Software Cog Engineer**^[69](Source6.html)^**. Though later
abandoned, the constraint indicated the software management's early
concern about memory overruns. Also, since the machine can directly
address the lower 4K of memory, programs were to be kept there, with the
upper portion for transient data**^[70](Source6.html)^**. Later, the
flight configuration of the computer evolved to one processor accessing
both memories. Therefore, a copy of the programs is kept in the lower
portion of each memory, but both upper portions are usable by the single
processor as a scratch pad**^[71](Source6.html)^**. If dual mode is
required, the memories are separated. Experience has produced increased
confidence in the memories. At first, complete loads had to be sent when
an update was done; recently, pieces of software have been allowed to be
inserted in the programs. Full redundancy between the memories is not
now automatically maintained**^[72](Source6.html)^**.

<div class="inbox">Box 6-3: Flight Data System Computer Executive

Like the command computer, the data computer has a simple executive.
Time is divided into twenty-four 2.5-millisecond intervals, called "P
periods." Each 24 P periods represent one imaging system scan line.
Eight hundred of those lines is a frame. At the beginning of each P
period, the software automatically returns to memory location 0000,
where it executes a routine that determines what functions to perform
during that P period**^[73](Source6.html)^**. Care is taken that the
software completes all pending processes in the 2.5-millisecond period,
a job made easier by the standardization of execution times once the
direct memory access cycle was added.

</div>

#### Voyager's Future

Voyager software development continued into the late 1980s. Kohl,
Wooddell, Greensburg, Deese, Johnson, Kopf, and others closely connected
with the hardware of Voyager's computers were then on other projects,
but Rice and Blizzard and their counterparts on the command computer and
attitude control computer were still programming, \[**186**\] preparing
Voyager 2 for Uranus and Voyager 1 to discover the boundary of the solar
wind. An increasing problem as the spacecraft recede from the earth is
the reduction in the data transmission rate. The closer a spacecraft is
to earth, the higher the bandwidth possible. Computer loads that once
took minutes now take hours because error checking by retransmitting to
earth is slowed. In the summer of 1984, a Flight Data System software
load took 4 hours, and the situation cannot
improve**^[74](Source6.html)^**. Voyager Project officials decided to
use the Flight Data System in dual processor mode for the first time for
the Uranus encounter to provide image data compression. Thus, the
information content remained high even though the transmission rate was
grossly reduced**^[75](Source6.html)^**.

Voyager's computer system did not carry on to the next JPL project.
Galileo combined the CCS and the Flight Data System into a single
Command and Data System. This is logical from JPL's standpoint because
both systems are the responsibility of the same Information Systems
Division. Attitude control is provided by a separate computer. Whereas
Voyager was a functionally distributed system with dual redundancy,
Galileo's Command and Data System contains computers that do true
distributed processing and use a new concept of redundancy. That system
may be a model for the future, as it can impact designs aimed at complex
spacecraft with extensive data processing needs, such as the Space
Station and Mariner Mark II, both due in the 1990s.

[^6-2a]: He was replaced in early 1976 by Chnstopher P.
Jones, who designed the integrated fault protection algorithms used on
the mission, but Frewing laid the groundwork for management of the
software.
