\newpageon{208}

### The Evolution of Automated Launch Processing

Rocket technology is both old and new. Since the Chinese
first started shooting off fireworks a millennium ago, the sight of a
rocket streaking ever faster skyward, a comet's tail of fire behind, has
excited even those unimpressed with machines. Fireworks rockets, and,
later, military bombardment rockets through the first three decades of
this century, shared the same components: casing, fuel, and payload.
Construction was complete when the gunpowder fuel was loaded in the
casing, warhead affixed, and a fuse planted the base. Such rockets could
be stored without maintenance and fired with little preparation, needing
only to assure that the fuse was still attached. The difficulty came in
the area of guidance. A set of fins or a balancing stick passively
guided the early rockets. Frequently they would turn on the men who
launched them or shoot horizontally over the heads of fireworks
watchers. Thus, the old technology of preparing rockets for flight
consisted of keeping them dry, aiming them carefully, and lighting the
fuse.

In Germany during the late 1930s the new technology of rockets began to
mature. Increased interest in rocketry developed in Europe and the
United States after World War I. Rocket societies flourished in England,
Germany, and the United States. Robert Goddard flew a liquid propellant
rocket, the first of its kind, in Massachusetts in 1926. Liquid fuels,
with their higher specific impulse and thrust potential, soon replaced
solid fuels as the primary area of propulsion research. Shortly after
Hitler came to power, the German army established a rocket development
program that led to the liquid-propellant A-4 (popularly known as the
V-2). A-4 rockets far exceeded the capabilities of previous ones,
terrorizing the populations of London and Antwerp in the latter stages
of World War II. Over 14 meters tall and weighing over 12,000 kilograms,
an A-4 carried nearly 1,000 kilograms of explosive payload up to 400
kilometers. Its guidance system was a radio beam-rider type with an
electronic analog computer controlling vanes in the exhaust and elevons
on the fins. If wind deflection caused the rocket to veer horizontally
off course, the analog computer would calculate corrections and activate
the vanes. Complex plumbing and turbopumps were needed to feed the
engine with fuel. Experience gained in nearly 2,000 expensive failures
led German technicians working on the A-4 to develop techniques of
testing the many components of the rocket during manufacture and before
committing it to flight. For example, the guidance system was tested at
the factory by an electronic analog computer that simulated the flight
of the rocket so that the system's reactions could be
observed**^[1](Source7.html)^**. On the launching pad, engineers could
test various moving parts of the vehicle by activating them using actual
physical connections to the firing room.

German rocket scientists who came to the United States after World War
II brought this new technology with them. Eventually based in
Huntsville, Alabama, at the Army's Redstone Arsenal, they \[**209**\]
conceived an increasingly sophisticated series of rockets: Redstone,
Jupiter, Juno, and Saturn. Concurrently, the Air Force chartered the
Atlas, Titan, and Thor ballistic missiles. During the 1950s, each of
these vehicles was developed in programs marred by frequent flight
failures. Actual numbers and the complexity of components grew by
several factors over the A-4. The new devices and their failures led to
more testing, both at the factory and before launch. The concept of a
"countdown," during which each flight-critical component of the vehicle
is systematically checked, reached a high level of efficiency.

As the 1960s began, most rockets and their payloads were still being
checked out by discrete connections between the components and a test
panel. When the countdown reached an advanced stage, particularly after
fueling, the test engineers were cloistered in a block-house. Through
cables from the rocket to the blockhouse, the engineers could monitor
the status of various components and activate tests. An engineer would
flip a switch, and something would happen, either on a dial or a strip
chart, that he could actually see and interpret. When the first Saturn I
rockets were launched and the Mercury spacecraft made their appearance,
both in 1961, it became obvious that the level of complexity of both
vehicles and payloads had reached the point where manual test methods
were inadequate. Individual NASA engineers and managers on different
programs began to evaluate the possibility of automating some of the
checkout procedures using digital computers. Eventually, this led to the
Shuttle's fully automated Launch Processing System.

The heart of the Shuttle is its computer system. Without it, no
component of the spacecraft could be adequately tested or monitored.
When a Shuttle is being refurbished after a flight in the Kennedy Space
Center's orbiter Processing Facility, a large double hangar near the
landing runway, the spacecraft's computers are connected to checkout and
launch computers located in a firing room in the Launch Control Center.
When moved to the Vehicle Assembly Building for mating with its fuel
tank and solid propellant boosters, the Shuttle is reconnected to the
firing room. After being transported to the pad, the final preparations
are also controlled from the firing room. Finally, countdown and launch
are executed from the same firing room. This scenario came after two
decades of evolution, during which the role of computers became dominant
both on board spacecraft and in launch processing. The integrated
techniques exemplified in the Shuttle Launch Processing System developed
from separate automated systems devised for vehicle checkout, spacecraft
checkout, and telemetry monitoring. Important in the evolution is the
part played by on-board computers. The journey toward full automation
got great impetus from the Saturn and Apollo programs.

![\[**210**\] Figure 7-1. Launch processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center:
the Shuttle Orbiter Processing Facility (left), the Vehicle Assembly
Building (center), and the Launch Control Center (right). (NASA 116-KSC
377C-82/41)](images/p210.jpg)
