\newpageon{210}

### Launch processing in the Saturn era

A Saturn V rocket with an Apollo spacecraft on top presented
a magnificent sight, which engineers nonetheless viewed with a mixture
of prideful awe and dread. No earthly booster since the Skylab launch
has been as large or as powerful. Shuttles being mated in the Vehicle
Assembly Building originally designed for the Saturn appeared as dwarfs
in houses made for giants. It looked as though there was nearly enough
room to stack them two high. The dread came from the fear of failure
among the thousands of components, many capable of bringing disaster and
killing a crew in flight. Early in the Saturn program automation began
to be introduced in the testing of the gargantuan rockets. Marshall
Space Flight Center acquired computers for Saturn vehicle checkout.
Marshall also had responsibility for the Launch Vehicle Digital Computer
(LVDC) housed in the Instrument Unit that \[**211**\] was the last stage
below the Apollo spacecraft on both Saturn IB and Saturn V
configurations. NASA's Launch Operations Center, later renamed Kennedy
Space Center, acquired computers for telemetry data reduction and
display and began work on the checkout systems used for the Apollo
spacecraft, a project later transferred to the Manned Spacecraft Center
in Houston. Each of these computer-controlled systems contributed to the
concepts and development of the Shuttle Launch Processing System, now
wholly based at the Kennedy Space Center.

#### Checkout of the Saturn Vehicle

Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville had primary responsibility
for the design, manufacture, and flight preparation of the Saturn
vehicles. In 1951, when Marshall was still the headquarters of the Army
Ballistic Missile Agency, Kurt H. Debus formed a launch team that
commuted to the Air Force's Eastern Test Range in Cape Canaveral,
Florida. Within a short period of time, the frequency of launches made
it necessary to establish a permanent group at the Cape, called the
Missile Firing Laboratory. When Marshall was established on July 1,
1960, the Laboratory was renamed the Launch Operations Directorate. By
1962, the activities at Cape Canaveral grew to the level that the Launch
Operations Center was formed separately from Marshall and given status
equal to other NASA centers. However, its charter stated that the
centers responsible for a particular vehicle or spacecraft had to
perform its checkout and test, so during the Apollo era Marshall
prepared Saturns and the Manned Spacecraft Center worked on the Apollos.
Personnel at the Launch Operations Center performed facilities
management and provided telemetry data reduction.

Computers were used both on-board the Saturn vehicles and in preparing
them for flight[^7-2a]. Ten Saturn I vehicles were launched
\[**212**\] between 1961 and 1965. Each was unmanned, the series being
used primarily to demonstrate that clustered-engine first stages and
high-energy upper stages were feasible. The first five launches did not
use a computer for guidance. Each was a suborbital mission utilizing a
German-made mechanical time-tilt device for
control**^[2](Source7.html)^**. On the fifth flight, an ASC-15 computer,
built by IBM originally for the Air Force's Titan, flew as a passenger
and handled telemetry transmissions**^[3](Source7.html)^**. It guided
the last five missions, several into earth orbit. When Saturn evolved
into the IB and V series, an Instrument Unit containing the LVDC was
mounted atop the S-IVB stage on each vehicle. Termed the "integrating
element" of Saturn, IBM was not only responsible for its computer but
for its construction**^[4](Source7.html)^**. Besides the computer, the
Instrument Unit contained the Launch Vehicle Data Adapter as an I/O
front end, analog control circuits and an ST-124 guidance platform. On
lunar missions the LVDC guided the spacecraft until the S-IVB stage
separation after the lunar trajectory insertion.

IBM's LVDC was architecturally quite similar to the Gemini guidance
computer**^[5](Source7.html)^**. It used nearly the same instruction
set, 26-bit data words and 13-bit instructions. One difference was that
the memory had two-syllable locations instead of Gemini's three.
Construction of the LVDC, however, was radically different. For
reliability reasons, triple modular redundant (TMR) circuits were
adopted. Even though the component count went up just 3.5 times, the
reliability increased 35 times**^[6](Source7.html)^**! Three logic
channels, each with seven functional modules, required 395
voters**^[7](Source7.html)^**. Packaging the computer used techniques
developed under the Advanced Saturn Technology Program commissioned by
Marshall and executed by IBM**^[8](Source7.html)^**. First of the "flat
pack" integrated circuit series, IBM applied this silicon semiconductor
technology in its System 360 commercial machines**^[9](Source7.html)^**.

Use of a computer in the launch vehicle led directly to using ones for
checkout. Marshall bought an RCA 110 to communicate with the IBM ASC-15
used in the Saturn I. Later, RCA upgraded its machine by enlarging the
memory to 32K 24-bit words of core and an additional 32K on an
associated magnetic drum. When the Saturn IBs began to be launched,
discrete circuits for interfaces with the rest of the launch vehicle
were added**^[10](Source7.html)^** .Renamed RCA 110As, these computers
continued to be augmented to handle more communications circuits, so
that by the time Saturn Vs appeared, the computers could maintain the
status of each of 1,512 signal lines**^[11](Source7.html)^**. At first
the 110s simply handled communications and switching. Activating test
procedures and conducting tests were still done manually. But in 1962,
IBM suggested that Chrysler convert the 110s they used for stage
checkout of the Saturn I to do the tests
automatically**^[12](Source7.html)^**. Even though the advantages of
automating procedures seem obvious, chief among them the fact that all
are done exactly alike, it was difficult to get people responsible for
checkout to convert from doing things.....

![\[**213**\] Figure 7-2. IBM engineers work inside the Saturn launch vehicle
Instrument Unit. (IBM photo)](images/p213.jpg)

.....manually, a theme repeated in other parts of the Apollo
program**^[13](Source7.html)^**. At that time, computers were seldom
used for on-line work, and most engineers were still unfamiliar with
them and wary of any more innovations in an already innovative program.
However, Chrysler converted some factory tests to automatic, using a
special language, "HYLA," to define them. Additionally, several Packard
Bell computers connected to a common memory automatically checked out
parts of the Saturn I. Use of a common memory as a computer
interconnection device reappeared in several later systems and is
critical to the success of the Shuttle's Launch Processing System.
Engineers wrote the language "SOL," or Systems-Oriented Language, for
the Packard Bell \[**214**\] machines. By late 1962, the Saturn V stage
contractors accepted the concept of automatic checkout and settled on a
common system, the Control Data Corporation CDC-924A computer, as the
factory test machine, with 110As assigned to the S-I stage and for the
assembled vehicle at the launch site**^[14](Source7.html)^**.

By this time, it was clear to Ludie Richard, a NASA engineer, and his
team at Marshall that preparing a language to help test engineers write
automated procedures was the key to continued acceptance of the
principle. A custom-designed programming language would leave control
over the definition of the tests in the hands of the engineers, avoiding
communication problems that might arise with computer programmers
inexperienced in checkout techniques**^[15](Source7.html)^**. IBM
eventually wrote routines for the RCA computers in assembly language,
but the majority of the automated tests were ATOLL (Acceptance, Test, or
Launch Language) programs stored on tape. Richard acquired the over two
dozen RCA 110As that were eventually used. His deputy, Charles
Swearingen, was put in charge of managing the flight computer, ground
computer, and checkout software**^[16](Source7.html)^**. James Lewis and
Joseph Medlock were instrumental in developing the checkout systems and
defining ATOLL**^[17](Source7.html)^**. IBM wrote both the flight
programs and the Saturn Operating System that ran on the RCA computers
and executed ATOLL procedures.

By mid-1963 the final configuration of the Saturn checkout computers was
set by Richard's group. At Launch Complex 34, the Saturn IB launch site,
one master RCA 110A was in the blockhouse and a slave underground at the
pad. For Saturn Vs at Complex 39, one RCA 110A was located in each of
the four firing rooms in the Saturn Launch Control Center, which was
attached to the Vehicle Assembly Building in which the Saturns would be
stacked. Each of four mobile launchers also contained a computer. In
addition to the 110As, the firing rooms also had a DDP-224 minicomputer
as a display driver for the CRTs showing output data to the engineers,
as well as a controller for slides and other visuals. Computers in the
mobile launchers could be used for checkout in the Assembly Building as
well as at the pads, a foreshadowing of the later Launch Processing
System. Due to reliability problems with the 110As, the launcher
computers used a dual memory configuration. Checkout programs filled
just half the memory, so the other half acted as a duplicate for
redundancy, the same principle as applied to the LVDC memory.

Part of the credit for the perfect success record of the Saturn vehicles
(all Saturn I, IB and V boosters flew without a failure) must be due to
the effectiveness of the checkout procedures. Without automatic testing
the confidence in the rockets could not have been attained, since they
were too complex for effective manual procedures. In addition to
checkout methods specific to the launch vehicle, the launch directors in
the firing rooms had access to automated test data....

![\[**215**\] Figure 7-3. A block diagram of the automated preflight checkout
hardware for the Saturn launch vehicle. (From IBM, SLCC Programming
System)](images/p215.jpg)

....from the spacecraft preflight test equipment developed by both the
Launch Operations Center and Manned Spacecraft Center.

#### Development of Apollo's Acceptance Checkout Equipment

From the first Apollo earth orbital flights through the lunar missions,
Skylab, and the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, ground testing and countdown
support of the spacecraft and its associated systems were the
responsibility of the ACE, or Acceptance Checkout
Equipment[^7-2b] .

![\[**216**\] Figure 7-4. A block diagram of the Saturn Operational Display System.
(from IBM, SLCC Programming System)](images/p216.jpg)

![\[**217**\] Figure 7-5. Typical firing room layout during the Saturn era. Nearly
250 engineers would crowd this area during a countdown. (From IBM, SLCC
Programming System)](images/p217.jpg)

\[**218**\] ACE stations were located in the Apollo Operations and
Checkout Building in the Industrial Area of the Kennedy Space Center, at
Launch Complexes 34 and 37, at the Johnson Space Flight Center, and at
North American Aviation and Grumman Corporation assembly plants. Two of
the North American stations were modified from use in assembling the
Shuttle in Palmdale, California**^[18](Source7.html)^**.

ACE resulted when a spacecraft checkout engineer figured that there had
to be an alternative to manual methods. Thomas Walton transferred from a
job in the computer room at Langley Space Flight Center to the Cape
Canaveral Launch Operations Center in early 1961. Assigned to the
checkout of Mercury spacecraft, by September he had enough of manual
testing and applied his background in computers to devising another way
of doing things**^[19](Source7.html)^**. Walton convinced his boss,
Harold G. Johnson, to let him build a digital ground station for
telemetry from the capsule. Using the Mercury missions as prototypes, he
proved that digital equipment could display the engineering data
previously shown on dials and strip charts. His success led to a search
for a computer system to handle the data in real time. With NASA's Gary
J. Woods, he traveled to several companies in search of a machine.
Walton did not believe that a computer like an IBM mainframe of that era
could do the job. Since they were designed for large-scale batch
processing, the difficulties of adapting such a computer to the
real-time world of telemetry displays and automated checkout would be
too great. Instead, he and Woods looked for simpler minicomputers such
as the Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-1 and the Control Data
Corporation CDC-168**^[20](Source7.html)^**. Walton convinced the Gemini
Project Office to buy a pair of CDC-168s to be used for checking out
their spacecraft. Meanwhile, plans continued to create a system
dedicated to the Apollo.

Marshall and Launch Operations personnel met in 1963 to determine
whether the checkout equipment for both the Saturn vehicle and the
Apollo spacecraft could be combined. Richard's and Walton's teams
decided to continue separate paths**^[21](Source7.html)^**. The results
were the Saturn checkout system and the first ACE unit using General
Electric discrete equipment and CDC-168 computers going on line in late
1964.

Although the first ACE stations were under construction, a small
political battle was raging over who would have ownership of the
program. Joseph Shea, then at NASA Headquarters in Washington, wanted to
control it from the Apollo Project Office there. Transferred to Houston
in 1963 to take over management of Apollo, he moved the ACE development
group of between 50 and 60 persons there
instead**^[22](Source7.html)^**. This act reinforced the feelings that
the Kennedy Space Center was to be strictly an operations center,
staying clear of research and development activities.

![\[**219**\] Figure 7-6. An ACE station with twin Control Data computers. (NASA
photo 107-KSC-67C-919)](images/p219.jpg)

Each ACE station used two digital computers with a common memory. One
was the Digital Command Computer, which processed commands from the
control or firing rooms to the spacecraft and was interconnected with
the ground support equipment. A second machine was the Data Processing
Computer, which drove the displays and controlled peripherals. Memory
could be directly accessed by discrete circuits in the ground station,
so data for both computers could be placed
there**^[23](Source7.html)^**. ACE stations could function in manual
command mode, semiautomatic, or fully automatic with manual override.
Stations in the Kennedy Industrial Area serviced the spacecraft both
before and after mating with the Saturn V boosters. When Launch Complex
39 went into use, checkout wires carrying digital formatted data ran
over 15 kilometers from the ACE stations to and from the pad and firing
rooms in the Saturn Launch Control Center using a video wideband
transmission system**^[24](Source7.html)^**. Of course ACE had to
cooperate with the RCA 110As at various points, so interfaces between
the different computers consisted of dedicated I/O registers, sense
lines, and priority interrupts**^[25](Source7.html)^**. ACE also had to
talk to the Apollo guidance computers in the command module (CM) and the
lunar excursion module (LEM). On the average, the CM computer operated
for 50 hours in support of the countdown. A CRT display controlled by
ACE duplicated the data shown on the display and keyboard while the
Apollo computer was in operation**^[26](Source7.html)^**.

\[**220**\] Walton judged that the development of ACE did a lot to
stimulate the technology of on-line processing. Certainly it helped
create techniques of interconnecting multiple different computer
systems. Also, this was one of the first times that data transfers in
the megabit range were accomplished over distance.

#### Digital Displays of Telemetry

Telemetry transmissions from the vehicle are one important source of
data for rocket engineers. In the early days of rocket flight research,
the causes of failures often could only be guessed. When the larger size
of later rockets made it possible to carry radios for sending back data,
sensors were added to supply engineering data from critical components
throughout the flight of the vehicle. If a failure occurred, it was
often possible to determine which components contributed most to it by
examining the reams of data sent back and originally recorded in analog
form on the ground. However, Tom Walton's pioneering digital ground
station for Mercury displayed the data in processed digital form. In
1962, the Atlas-Centaur project automated postflight telemetry data
reduction**^[27](Source7.html)^**. By the mid-1960s, digital telemetry
displays were standard at Kennedy Space Center, provided by a pair of
mainframe computers in the Central Instrumentation Facility.

Kennedy acquired two General Electric 635 computers for telemetry
monitoring and batch processing of institutional programs. GE 635s were
36-bit processors capable of double-precision
arithmetic**^[28](Source7.html)^**. Programmers prepared separate code
for each of the Delta, Atlas-Centaur, and Saturn flight vehicles. Delta
and Atlas launch pads, as well as Complexes 34, 37, and 39, could be
switch connected to the computers at any one time. Forty different
displays were possible and could be transmitted to the appropriate
blockhouse or Launch Control Center firing room**^[29](Source7.html)^**.
NASA's Bruce Miller was in charge of systems programming for the GE
computers, with Bradley Hughes as the chief scientific programmer.

These computers had the longest operational life of any installed at the
Kennedy Space Center. GE delivered the first machine in late 1965. A
second came on line in early 1966. Until May of 1983-18 years later!-
one was still in use driving blockhouse displays for Delta and
Atlas-Centaur. GE had long been out of the computer business by then,
having sold its digital computer division to Honeywell in the early
1970s. Kennedy retained a permanent systems programmer from GE (who
later moved to Honeywell) to keep the operating systems going and used a
retired blockhouse 635 from Wallops Island as a source of
parts**^[30](Source7.html)^**. From the beginning the computers had a
dual operating system. Batch institutional jobs could be run at the same
\[**221**\] instant a real-time telemetry program was running, except
when a Saturn was being supported, as its program was so big it pushed
out the batch programs. When Kennedy Space Center officials searched for
a second machine for the Central Instrumentation Facility, they
considered other vendors. IBM's branch manager in Cape Canaveral, W. O.
Robeson, sent a letter suggesting a System 360/50 as an administrative
computer, pointing out that evidence from prior telemetry computers
indicated that they rarely failed**^[31](Source7.html)^**. The dual
operating systems could then be abandoned. However, Kennedy bought the
second 635 to provide a redundant backup anyway, accepting the loss of
batch processing during Saturn operations.

Telemetry data reduction computers thus provided yet another source of
information to the launch directors in the Apollo/Saturn era. Still,
some engineers were convinced that the computer data were never
accurate, just as their colleagues in the checkout world had to be
dragged into automation**^[32](Source7.html)^**. Regardless, telemetry
displays became an integral part of the technology of launch processing.

#### Impacts of the Apollo/Saturn Era on the Shuttle Launch Processing System

Developing the major computer components of the launch processing system
for Apollo/Saturn provided software contractors such as IBM and the
Kennedy Space Center staff valuable experiences later transferred to the
Shuttle Launch Processing System and onboard software for the Shuttle
program. Additionally, some techniques known in theory, but never
properly applied, found justification during the Apollo/Saturn programs.
The areas of impact included the modularization of software, lessons
learned by IBM as a key future contractor, and Walton's continued
influence on ground computer concepts.

Software written for the LVDC and the GE 635 computers started as single
monolithic programs and evolved to modularized programs at just about
the same time. Flight software for the ASC-15 computer used on the
Saturn I vehicles was necessarily monolithic because it had to be
sequentially executed and strictly timed**^[33](Source7.html)^**. Any
changes impacted on the execution time, and therefore had to be
carefully integrated. The computer could not handle waiting for an
interrupt to instigate an action. Actions had to be initiated by the
program relative to its starting time. When the ASC-15 gave way to the
LVDC, a more powerful and flexible machine, programmers continued in the
monolithic mode. Finally, IBM staff realized that by preparing the
software in essentially free-standing chunks, the impact of changes
would be limited to the modules and not spread side effects throughout
the software. This discovery came late in the Saturn program but
\[**222**\] early enough to affect the development of the Skylab
on-board software. Also, IBM separated the modules into groups
consisting of the control subsystem and applications subsystem, which is
a prototype of the Shuttle on-board software
organization**^[34](Source7.html)^**. IBM helped transfer this concept
to the Shuttle by moving people such as Kyle Rone and Lynn Killingbeck
from working on the Saturn computer directly to the Houston office to
support the Shuttle software development. NASA also independently moved
toward modularization when, in 1973, it broke down the programs used on
the GE 635s to support telemetry data reduction. Before then, it took an
average of 3 months to implement a simple change in the monolithic
version of the program, because of the massive debugging necessary to
eliminate side effects**^[35](Source7.html)^**. Thus, modularization
came to be expected by NASA as part of software design. If
modularization was not used on the Shuttle on-board software, preparing
new flight loads would have been impossible within the projected time
between flights of an individual orbiter.

Besides modularization, Apollo/Saturn significantly influenced IBM's
later work on the Shuttle's on-board software, especially the company's
design of the system used for Shuttle launch processing. IBM summarized
its conclusions in a document released in late 1972, just at the time
both Shuttle ground and on-board software contracts were being
let**^[36](Source7.html)^**. The study recommended that the vehicle's
flight software be capable of reloading all programs on
board**^[37](Source7.html)^**. This was implemented on the Shuttle, as
the mass memory units (MMUs) contain all preflight and flight software
for the primary avionics computers, the display computers, and the
engine control computers. Ground software recommendations required that
all checkout functions use a higher order language and that checkout be
conducted using one computer system**^[38](Source7.html)^**.

During Saturn, both ATOLL and machine language programs controlled
preflight tests, the machine language routines absorbing a considerable
amount of development and maintenance time. This lesson helped spur the
creation of an improved checkout language, GOAL. In regard to
consolidating all functions in one computer, IBM thought that the
difficulties of integrating the two RCA computers, the DDP-224 display
computer, and the telemetry reduction computers were excessive. By
taking that position, IBM found itself squared off against the
distributed concepts envisioned by Tom Walton and his team for the
Shuttle system. Walton refused to move to Houston when Shea transferred
the ACE team. By staying at Kennedy, he was able to influence the
structure of the Shuttle Launch Processing System and help make the
Center fully responsible for all checkout and launch operations for the
entire vehicle, a significant change from the Apollo/Saturn program.

[^7-2a]: For a complete description of the evolution of the
Saturn and its components, see Roger Bilstein, [Stages to Saturn: A
Technological History of the Apollo/Saturn Launch
Vehicles](http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4206/sp4206.htm), NASA SP-4206,
1980. Chapter 8 centers on the use of computers in checkout and the
development of the Instrument Unit and its flight computer. Chapter 16
of Charles D. Benson and William B. Faherty, [Moonport: A History of
Apollo Launch Facilities and
Operations](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4204/cover.html),
NASA SP-4204, 1978, describes the development of automated launch
operations. Due to these prior treatments, my account will concentrate
on briefly summarizing the use of the computers to provide the necessary
introduction to the section on the Launch Processing System, rather than
retelling the whole story. Some new evidence is presented where
applicable, but the reader is urged to consult both previous works.

[^7-2b]: The acronym ACE evolved from PACE, or Preflight
Acceptance Checkout Equipment, which appears in some of the literature.
It was discovered that the name conflicted with a commercial product, so
the "Preflight" was dropped. Prior to PACE, there was a short period
when the equipment was known as SPACE, but apparently not officially.
