\newpageon{242}

### Computers in mission control

Mission control begins when launch processing ends. At the
point a missile is committed to flight-as when the Shuttle solid rockets
are fired or a liquid-fueled booster rises an inch off the
pad-responsibility for monitoring and control of the spacecraft shifts
from the launch director and his crew to the flight director's team.
Three major tasks occupy the flight controllers: sampling the telemetry
stream to make certain everything is going well and to collect science
data, doing navigation calculations, and sending commands. Manned and
unmanned spacecraft require this support, with manned spacecraft having
the advantage of carrying observers and decision makers to supplement
what can be done from the ground. To successfully support both types of
missions, digital computers must operate on massive amounts of data in
real time. Mission control tasks are beyond the abilities of humans
alone.

Mission control centers and their equipment are located far from the
launch site. NASA's manned mission control began in 1961 with Project
Mercury at the Cape Canaveral launch area, but its computers were at
Goddard Space Flight Center near Washington, D.C. Since 1964, early in
the Gemini program, both computers and controllers have been housed in
Building 30 at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. NASA's unmanned
near-earth missions are controlled mostly from Goddard, with most deep
space missions handled through the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL)
Spaceflight Operations Facility in Pasadena, California.

In addition to control centers, mission support requires numerous
tracking stations to collect and format telemetry and radar data to help
in monitoring and navigation and to transmit commands. These widely
scattered stations and the control centers are linked together by the
NASA Communications Network (NASCOM), headquartered at Goddard. The
Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (STADAN), used to specialize
in unmanned spacecraft but, having combined with the Manned Spaceflight
Network (MSFN) in 1972, has become the general network. When all the
specified Tracking and Data Relay Satellites are in place, they will
take over much of the manned flight communications, yet tracking is
still a STADAN responsibility. Lunar and planetary probes are the venue
of the Deep Space Network, which operates three main stations at
Goldstone, California, Madrid, Spain, and Canberra, Australia, each with
a variety of antennas ranging up to 64 meters in diameter. The Deep
Space Network helped with manned lunar missions when the Apollo
spacecraft \newpageon{243} passed a distance of 10,000 miles from
earth[^8-1a].

In contrast with on-board computers, computer systems used in control
centers and tracking stations have primarily consisted of off-the-shelf
equipment. NASA could take this approach to procurement because, so far,
adequate processing power to achieve mission objectives has been
available in commercial systems. When mission control began in the late
1950s and early 1960s, software technology had not reached the necessary
level of sophistication. The prime contractor had to develop completely
new operating system software for the Vanguard, Mercury, and Gemini
programs, but was able to incorporate large chunks of existing operating
systems into those used for Apollo and Shuttle, as well as some later
deep space missions. This was possible in part because experience and
techniques learned from designing the original operating systems were
used in new commercial products.

[^8-1a]: For the story of the tracking and communication
networks, see William R. Corliss, *Histories of the Space Tracking and
Data Acquisition Network (STADAN), the Manned Space Flight Network
(MSFN), and the NASA Communications Network (NASCOM)*, NASA CR-140390,
June, 1974, and N.A. Renzetti, ed., *A History of the Deep Space Network
From Inception to January 1, 1969*, Jet Propulsion Laboratory TR 32-1533,
September 1, 1971. Each has considerable detail about the technical
developments involved, including the decision to use computers at
stations.
