\newpageon{299}

## Epilogue: Themes in NASA's Computing Experience {-}

Running throughout the individual histories of American
space flight computer systems are five themes that encapsulate NASA's
intentions and experiences. Developing and evolving over the last
quarter century, they promise to dominate NASA's use of computers for
space flight well into the future. The themes are: the need for real
time systems, the use of redundancy to maintain reliability and safety,
the choice of off-the-shelf equipment wherever possible, the adoption of
distributed processing, and adherence to the principles of software
engineering in system development.

#### Real-Time Systems

NASA had no choice but to become a leader in the development of
real-time systems, beginning with the decision to use computers to
support manned and unmanned flights. Including a computer on-board
spacecraft further sealed NASA's fate as a developer and user of
embedded computer systems-computers within larger systems replacing or
enhancing existing hardware. Therefore, it is in this field of computing
that NASA has had its greatest impact.

Contractors working on NASA's real-time systems have been able to
benefit from what they learned in the process of completing their
contract obligations. For example, an immediate application of
techniques used in the Mercury Monitor was IBM's System 360 operating
system. Later, experience with fly-by-wire systems quickly spread to
civilian and military applications. Within 10 years of the first digital
fly-by-wire aircraft flight, airliners using the technology were in
prototype. As computers continue to shrink in size and increase in
power, the applications of real-time computing will grow enormously.

#### Reliability and Safety Through Redundancy

NASA has achieved increasing levels of reliability through a concurrent
increase in the levels of redundancy. Ground systems always had an
active backup. On-board systems acquired them as size and performance
improvements made it possible. The use of computers running in parallel,
working on the same calculations, made necessary the development of
redundancy management techniques. Thus, again, NASA pioneered an area
which was as yet poorly developed.

\newpageon{300}

#### Proven Equipment

Even though NASA led the way in the development and use of
some aspects of modern computing, one area in which innovation was
purposely avoided was hardware. Acting in the belief that existing
equipment is inherently more reliable and less risky than new,
custom-designed computers, NASA sought to acquire proven processors
wherever possible. As a result, flight systems are often years behind
the current state-of-the-art. Nevertheless, they can complete the
missions for which they were purchased. In long-term programs, such as
the Shuttle, processors are being replaced by newer (but not the newest)
equipment where possible.

#### Distributed Processing

Partly as a result of safety considerations, partly for convenience, and
partly because different organizations often contribute subsystems to
the same spacecraft, there is a continuing trend toward the use of
distributed computing both in flight and on the ground. Most new NASA
computer systems are functionally distributed. On an unmanned
spacecraft, for instance, separate computers handle command
interpretation, data acquisition and attitude control. Other examples
include the Shuttle Launch Processing System and the Shuttle itself,
which has computers on the main engines as well as other components.
Again, improved processors will make it cheaper and easier to continue
this trend in the future.

#### Software Engineering

Software engineering has always been a big part of NASA's business, even
in the era before 1968 when the term did not yet exist. In recent years,
it has become a central focus of activity. NASA has developed an
Agency-wide software development standard and made it available to the
various Centers. Short courses on software engineering topics are being
taught routinely. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory has established a
software resource center. Goddard Space Flight Center regularly sponsors
a software engineering conference. Conferences have been held to get an
early start on the use of the the Ada programming language in the Space
Station project. Obviously, NASA is committed to improvement and high
quality in this field, as more and more functions on space flights are
taken over by computers.

\[**301**\] In all, NASA has very effectively adapted its operations to
the Computer Age. Computers, frankly, make useful spaceflight possible.
Even though a spacecraft could theoretically be placed in orbit using a
World War II tilt-table missile guidance system and mechanical clocks,
landing safely on the moon, flying within kilometers of the outer
planets, and landing on runways after descending from space would all be
unlikely happenings with the old technology. As Man begins the era of
permanent presence in space, his partner will be millions of bits
flashing in a sea of transistors, a helpmate in the discovery of the
universe.
