### Introduction

\[**135**\] Unmanned spacecraft computers differ from manned spacecraft
computers in that they are designed to work much longer and use much
less spacecraft resources. A typical manned mission lasts a week or
less; the exception was Skylab, whose computers operated for 9 months
straight and again later during its reactivation mission. Unmanned
missions in earth orbit or to the outer planets can last a decade or
longer. Manned spacecraft usually carry large auxiliary power units
based on fuel cell technology, as power requirements for life support,
experiments, and computers are high. Spacecraft in earth orbit are often
dependent on solar cell arrays, which are by nature low-power
generators. Interplanetary probes use either solar cells or small
radioisotope generators. Clearly, these circumstances cause different
requirements for computers.

Of the two types of unmanned spacecraft, one is designed for earth orbit
operations and the other flies to the moon, planets, or deep space.
Earth orbiters usually need no navigation after achieving orbit; space
probes, however, are critically dependent on proper guidance. Earth
orbiters can be commanded nearly instantaneously from the ground during
the roughly 10% of the time they are "visible" to ground stations.
Interplanetary probes need to be autonomous, at least capable of
independent routine operation, due to speed of light delays in
communication and longer periods out of earth control. Multiple missions
and simple geography prevent interplanetary probes from being in
constant contact with the three Deep Space Network stations. Therefore,
the basis of fault handling on an interplanetary probe is failure
detection and repair, whereas earth orbiters concentrate on "safing" the
spacecraft until the ground stations can help out. For these reasons,
computers became more sophisticated on spacecraft designed to leave the
gravity pull of the earth.

Moreover, the different computers have distinct origins. Many near earth
spacecraft used a variant of a single machine developed at the Goddard
Space Flight Center, whereas the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of the
California Institute of Technology, a long time NASA contractor, has
dominated computer construction for deep space flight, designing and
building an evolving series of computers for the Agency's interplanetary
probes. These two lines of development represent the most fruitful of
NASA's forays into computer \[**136**\] research. Computers on manned
spacecraft were generally developed from other computers (Apollo from
Polaris; 4Pi from the System 360). Computers in ground operations were
adapted from commercial machines. However, computers on unmanned
spacecraft were custom designed. In these cases, NASA was not only a
contract monitor but was actively involved in development.

The making of the first NASA Standard Spacecraft Computer, which has
controlled a number of earth-orbiting missions, has been described
elsewhere[^2-intro.a]. As can be inferred by its name,
NASA designed this computer to fly on multiple, varying missions, which
it has done to good effect. For example, both the Solar Maximum Mission
and the Hubble Space telescope used the computer. Goddard Space Flight
Center led development of the device over a 10-year period from the late
1960s to the late 1970s.

![\[**136**\] Figure B: The NASA Standard Spacecraft Computer I in its packaging.
(NASA photo)](images/p136.jpg)

In contrast, machines built at JPL have had a longer and more related
history. Although some reuse has occurred, the, various space probes
built at JPL carried mission-unique computers of increasing \[**137**\]
power and complexity, paralleling the development of computers for
manned spacecraft. Unlike the manned programs, however, JPL sponsored
fundamental research into spacecraft computing, which was then
translated into concepts that guided the development of flight systems.
The result was a series of innovative and flexible on-board computers.

[^2-intro.a]:See Raymond G. Hartenstein, Ann C.
Merwarth, William N. Stewart, Thomas D. Taylor, and Charles E.
Trevathan, "Development and Application of NASA's First Standard
Spacecraft Computer," *Commun. ACM*, 27(9), 902--913 (September 1984.)
