### Introduction

\[**205**\] NASA's ground computer systems are characterized by large
size, by the implementation of real-time programming, and by the use of
may computers connected together. The need for these three attributes
has caused NASA and its contractors to devise new techniques for
computer applications, such as operating systems for mainframe computers
capable of handling real-time processing and sophisticated networking.
Through these developments NASA has had its largest impact on computing
in the commercial world.

Differences between ground-based computers and on-board computers center
on the relative ease of hardware procurement with the continued
difficulty of software development. On-board computers evolved from
custom-made systems to the largely off-the-shelf Skylab and Shuttle
computers. Ground computers followed a more conventional line, as they
could be, from the beginning, commercially available systems, though
applied to noncommercial tasks. NASA examined many existing computer
systems each time it needed a machine. In fact, the government's bidding
process gave NASA a larger mix of different vendors' equipment than most
commercial enterprises, causing occasional difficulties in connecting
computers together. This problem and that of adapting business machines
to real-time processing were largely solved by software. Contractors
received invaluable experience in large systems development and
networking in the process of achieving NASA's goals.

Ground-based computer systems are used for preflight checkout and the
launching of space vehicles, controlling both unmanned and manned
missions, creating simulations of rocket flight for vehicle development
and of space flight for crew training, processing telemetry data from
launch vehicles and space probes, and in basic research. In the
following chapters these functions are grouped into launch processing,
mission control, and support tasks. Chapter 7 develops the concept of
launch processing from the manual era to the fully automated Shuttle
flight preparation. The chief result from this effort was a large
integrated network of computers that proved to be highly innovative.
Chapter 8 presents computer systems in both the manned Mission Control
Center in Houston and the unmanned control \[206\] centers at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and Goddard Space Flight Center. In Chapter
9, the uses of computers in simulations and data reduction are
discussed.
