### Introduction

\[**7**\] In the first 25 years of its existence, NASA conducted five
manned spaceflight programs: Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and
Shuttle. The latter four programs produced spacecraft that had on-board
digital computers. The Gemini computer was a single unit dedicated to
guidance and navigation functions. Apollo used computers in the command
module and lunar excursion module, again primarily for guidance and
navigation. Skylab had a dual computer system for attitude control of
the laboratory and pointing of the solar telescope. NASA's Space Shuttle
is the most computerized spacecraft built to date, with five
general-purpose computers as the heart of the avionics system and twin
computers on each of the main engines. The Shuttle computers dominate
all checkout, guidance, navigation, systems management, payload, and
powered flight functions.

NASA's manned spacecraft computers are characterized by increasing power
and complexity. Without them, the rendezvous techniques developed in the
Gemini program, the complex mission profiles followed in Apollo, the
survival of the damaged Skylab, and the reliability of the Shuttle
avionics system would not have been possible.

When NASA began to develop systems for manned spacecraft,
general-purpose computers small and powerful enough to meet the
requirements did not exist. Their development involved both commercial
and academic organizations in repackaging computer technology for
spaceflight.
