### Preface

\[**ix**\] NASA's use of computers in spaceflight operations is a very
important and large topic. Any attempt to tell the complete story of the
people, calculating machines, and computer programs involved in
spaceflight would fill many volumes, if, in fact, it could be told at
all. The book you are about to read is a subset of all that could be
said. This is the explanation of why some things appear here and others
do not, and why the book is organized as it is.

When Monte Wright, then director of the NASA History Office, and I first
discussed the outline for this project in 1981 and 1982, it seemed that
he thought NASA had had a terrific impact on the development of computer
technology. Many others shared his view, reasoning that since NASA used
computers more extensively than almost any other organization, the
Agency must have prodded the computer industry by making challenge after
challenge to its computer contractors. One good reason, then, for
writing a book on NASA's use of computers was to study the impact of
NASA's demands. At the time, I did not know enough to hypothesize one
way or another.

Obviously, the book required limits. Since the use of computers in
administrative work paralleled that of private industry, and since the
chief technological advances occurred in the flight program, we agreed
to limit the project to an examination of computer systems used in
actual spaceflight or in close support of it. Computers and systems used
in administration and in aeronautical and other research not directly
related to spaceflight were ignored.

Despite these restrictions, the amount of material and the number of
systems involved remained enormous. Any thought of a chronological
history had to be abandoned, because keeping the various threads running
in order and in parallel was too difficult. Instead, I wrote a topical
history, each chapter dealing with either a specific program, such as
the Gemini or Apollo onboard computers, or a closely related set of
systems, such as launch processing or mission control. This episodic
organization made it possible to adapt the writing of the book to the
present state of the subject area, and also to NASA's structure. One
disadvantage to this approach is that, at first glance, the book has the
appearance of a serial description of systems with no obvious
relationship to one another. In fact, the decision to order the three
major parts of the book as they are was strictly arbitrary. And yet,
this organization actually reflects reality. Nearly all the systems
described here were developed independently, by different teams, at
different sites. Continuity occured only when a series of systems were
built under the auspices of a single center, such as the Gemini, Apollo,
and Shuttle systems through the Johnson Space \[**x**\] Flight Center.
In the rare instances that some technological exchange occurred, it is
highlighted. Despite the independent development of the various systems,
some common problems and experiences provided threads with which to bind
the chapters. These are presented in the Introduction and developed
throughout the book where they apply.

By nature, the subject of computers is technically intensive. Many times
things must be discussed that require concentration on the design and
engineering attributes of a system. Often the main characters in this
history are the machines themselves, and not their creators. A glossary
of computer terms and frequent explanatory material in the text should
be enough to help those not familiar with computers to understand the
story. Additionally, technical material too important to be left out of
this history but not crucial to following the flow of events is set
apart in boxes. I have retained the technical material in an attempt to
fulfill the second objective of the NASA internal history program:

> Thoughtful study of NASA history can help agency managers accomplish the
> missions assigned to the agency. Understanding NASA's past aids in
> understanding its present situation and illuminates possible future
> directions.

Hopefully, my choice of the level of the material does not interfere
with the first objective, which is the wide "dissemination of
information concerning its activities and the results thereof." I
believe that at this time a book on this subject that is more expository
than interpretive in nature is of greater use to the agency and the
historical community. No one before me had waded through this material,
therefore, much of my job was the identification of the best sources and
the recording of the most useful experiences. Now that this groundwork
has been done, more selective and incisive histories can be written.

One final note: often in corporations and government agencies individual
achievement is buried within the institution. NASA is no exception. It
was exceedingly difficult to get people both in the agency and in
contractor organizations to identify who did what, or even take personal
credit where appropriate. Wherever I was able to assign responsibility,
I did so, but, unfortunately, those instances seem less common than the
times I had to credit the development to the institution. Hopefully
those who are not mentioned but should have been can take pride that
their collective achievements are now part of history.

| James E. Tomayko
| Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
| April, 1987
